Iram pande mihi Pelidae, Diua, superbi	Tell me, Goddess, the wrath of proud Pelides,
Tristia quae miseris iniecit funera Grais	that injected sorrowful deaths among the wretched Greeks,
Atque animas fortes heroum tradidit Orco	and handed over souls of mighty heros to Orcus,
Latrantumque dedit rostris uolucrumque trahendos	and gave to the mouths of dogs and birds to tear
Illorum exsangues, inhumatis ossibus, artus.	the bloodless limbs of their unburied bones.
Confiebat enim summi sententia regis,	For it confessed the sentence of the high King,
protulerant* ex quo discordia pectora pugnas,	from which also discordant hearts had carried on quarrels,
Sceptriger Atrides et bello clarus Achilles.	Scepter-bearing Atrides and Achilles, famous in war.
Quis deus hos ira tristi contendere iussit?	Which god commanded to draw this sad wrath tight?
Latonae et magni proles Iouis. Ille Pelasgum	The Offspring of Leto and great Jove! He sent
infestam regi pestem in praecordia misit	the hostile persistence into the Pelasgian king's heart,
implicuitque graui Danaorum corpora morbo.	and involved the Danaans' bodies in grave distress.
Nam quondam Chryses, sollemni tempora uitta	For one day Chryses, his temples wrapped
implicitus, raptae fleuit solacia natae	in solemn bands, wept, the solace of his daughter taken,
inuisosque dies inuisaque tempora noctis	days hateful and times of night hateful.
egit et assiduis impleuit questibus auras.	He urged and unceasingly filled the breezes with complaints.
Postquam nulla dies animum maerore leuabat	After no day lifted his soul from grief,
nullaque lenibant patrios solacia fletus,	and no solaces eased the fathers' tears,
castra petit Danaum genibusque affusus Atridae	he aims at the Danaans' campsand, prostrate on Atrides' knees,
per superos regnique decus miserabilis orat,	prays in misery, by the gods above and the kingdom's glory,
ut sibi causa suae reddatur nata salutis.	that the daughter be returned to him for her safety's sake.
Dona simul praefert. Vincuntur fletibus eius	He brings gifts at the same time.The Myrmidons are won over
Myrmidones reddique patri Chryseida censent.	by his tears, and recommend to return Chryseis to her father.
Sed negat Atrides Chrysenque excedere castris	Yet Atrides refuses,and commands Chryses to leave the camps,
despecta pietate iubet: ferus ossibus imis	piety despised: wild love clings to his innermost bones,
haeret amor spernitque preces damnosa libido.	and for damnable lust he spurns prayers.
Contemptus repetit Phoebeia templa sacerdos	The priest, despised, returns to Phoebis' temple
squalidaque infestis maerens secat unguibus ora	and, grieving, tears his dirty face with hostile nails; 
dilaceratque comas annosaque tempora plangit.	and tearing hair, also strikes his ancient temples.
Mox ubi depositi gemitus lacrimaeque quierunt,	Next, when moans were laid down and tears are quiet,
Fatidici his sacras compellat uocibus aures:	he appeals to the sacred ears of the Fate-Tellerby these words:
"Quid coluisse mihi tua numina, Delphice, prodest	"What benefit is it to meto have worshiped your divinities, Delphic god,
aut castam uitam multos duxisse per annos?	or to have led a chaste life for many years?
Quidue iuuat sacros posuisse altaribus ignes,	What does it help to have placed sacred fires on altars,
si tuus externo iam spernor ab hoste sacerdos?	if already I, your priest, am scorned by a hostile enemy?
En, haec desertae redduntur dona senectae?	Look! Are these gifts returned to my deserted old age?
Si gratus tibi sum, sim te sub uindice tutus.	If I am pleasing to you,let me be upheld under your vindication.
Aut si qua, ut luerem sub acerbo crimine poenas,	Or if otherwise,that I atone for crime under bitter judgment,
inscius admisi, cur o tua dextera cessat?	I have admitted unknown, oh, why does your right arm stop?
Posce sacros arcus, in me tua derige tela:	Demand the sacred bow, aim your arrows against me:
auctor mortis erit certe deus. Ecce, merentem	the author of death will be a god, certainly.Look! I am the deserving one!
fige patrem; cur nata luit peccata parentis	Pierce the father; why does the daughter atone for parental sin,
atque hostis duri patitur miseranda cubile?."	and suffer, miserable, the bed of a harsh enemy?"
Dixerat. Ille sui uatis prece motus acerbis	He finished speaking.Apollo, moved by his bitter prayer of prophecy,
luctibus infestat Danaos pestemque per omnes	infects the Danaans with pestilence,bringing grievous sufferings through all.
immittit populos: uulgus ruit undique Graium	He throws it in among the peoples:a crowd of Greeks falls on every side,
uixque rogis superest tellus, uix ignibus aer,	and hardly ground remains for funeral pyres,hardly air for fires.
deerat ager tumulis. Iam noctis sidera nonae	The field lacks space for burials. Already, nine stars of night
transierant decimusque dies patefecerat orbem,	and a tenth day passing, had made the world known,
cum Danaum proceres in coetum clarus Achilles	when famous Achilles calls together the Danaans' nobles
conuocat et causas hortatur pestis iniquae	in council, and urges Thestor's sons to make evident
edere Thestoriden. Tunc Calchas numina diuum	the causes of the hostile plague.Then Calchas consults the divinities of the gods,
consulit et causam pariter finemque malorum	and finds both cause and end together of the evils.
inuenit effarique uerens ope tutus Achillis	And fearing to speak, by aid of Achilles' protection,
haec ait: "Infesti placemus numina Phoebi	he says this: "We must placatethe divinities of hostile Phoebus,
reddamusque pio castam Chryseida patri,	and return chaste Chryseis to the pious father,
si uolumus, Danai, portus intrare salutis."	if we want, Danaans, to enter gates of health."
Dixerat. Exarsit subito uiolentia regis:	He finished speaking. The King's violence blazed up at once:
Thestoriden dictis primum compellat amaris	He addresses bitter words to Thestor's son first
mendacemque uocat. Tum magnum incusat Achillem	and calls him a liar. Moreover, he accuses great Achilles
inque uicem ducis inuicti conuicia suffert.	and in turn he suffers the abuses of the unconquerable leader.
Confremuere omnes. Tandem clamore represso	All complain loudly. At length, the outcry repressed,
cogitur inuitos aeger dimittere amores	the sick man is forced against his will to give up sexual lusts,
intactamque pio reddit Chryseida patri	and returns Chryseis intact to the pious father
multaque dona super. Quam cunctis notus Vlixes	and many gifts above. Ulysses, whom all know,
impositam puppi patrias deuexit ad arces	placing her aboard ship, returned herby sail to her homeland's strongholds.
atque iterum ad classes Danaum sua uela retorsit.	and again turned his sail back to the Danaans' bands.
Protinus infesti placantur numina Phoebi	Immediately, the divinities of hostile Phoebus are placated
et prope consumptae uires redduntur Achiuis.	and strengths, nearly consumed,are returned to the Achaeans.
Non tamen Atridae Chryseidis excidit ardor:	Nevertheless the ardor of Atrides forChryseis does not disappear:
maeret et amissos deceptus luget amores.	and, deceived by partings, he grieves and mourns lusts.
Mox rapta magnum Briseide priuat Achillem	Soon, he robs great Achilles, taking Briseis,
solaturque suos alienis ignibus ignes.	and lightens his fires by another's fires.
At ferus Aeacides nudato protinus ense	But wild Aeacides aims at Atrides
tendit in Atriden et, ni sibi reddat honestae	at once by naked sword and, unless he returns to him
munera militiae, letum crudele minatur,	the prizes of soldiery, he cruelly threatens death; 
nec minus ille parat contra defendere se ense.	nor less the other prepares to defend himself by the sword.
Quod nisi casta manu Pallas tenuisset Achillem,	That unless chaste Pallas had taken Achilles by hand,
turpem caecus amor famam liquisset in aeuum	blind lust would have bequeathed a shameful reputation
gentibus Argolicis. Contempta uoce minisque	to the Argive nations for all time.And despising the threatening voice,
inuocat aequoreae Pelides numina matris	Pelides invokes the divinities of his sea-born mother
ne se Plistheniden contra patiatur inultum.	that she not suffer himto be unavenged against Plisthenides.
At Thetis audita nati prece deserit undas	But Thetis, hearing the son's prayer, abandons the waves
castraque Myrmidonum iuxta petit et monet armis	and, beside the Myrmidons' camps,she begs and warns of arms,
abstineat dextram ac congressibus; inde per auras	that he keep the right arm away from gatherings:from there through breezes
emicat aetherias et in aurea sidera fertur.	she bolts up the skies and comes to splendid stars.
Tunc genibus regis sparsis affusa capillis:	Then, prostrating herselfon the King's knees, hair scattered,
"Pro nato ueni genetrix en ad tua supplex	"I've come for my son. Look! A mother, suppliant to your
numina, summe parens; ulciscere meque meumque	divinities, highest parent: to avenge both me and my
corpus ab Atrida, quodsi permittitur illi	body from Atrides;  if it is permitted him
ut flammas impune mei uiolarit Achillis,	that he violate unpunished the flames of my Achilles,
turpiter occiderit superata libidine uirtus."	and wickedly kill virtue by overweening lust."
Iuppiter haec contra: "Tristes depone querelas,	Jupiter answers this: "Put away sad complaints,
magni diua maris, mecum labor iste manebit.	goddess of the great sea. This labor will remain with me.
Tu solare tui maerentia pectora nati."	You console your son's grieving heart."
Dixit. At illa leues caeli delapsa per auras	He spoke. But she, gliding lightly down the sky by breezes
litus adit patrium gratasque sororibus undas.	comes to her father's shore,and the waves pleasing to her sisters.
Offensa est Iuno: "Tantum"que ait, "optime coniunx,	Juno was offended."And does the daughter of Doris matter so much,
Doride nata ualet, tantum debetur Achilli,	"great husband?" she says. "Is so much owed Achilles,
ut mihi quae coniunx dicor tua quaeque sororis	that to me who am called your spouse, and likewise sister,
dulce fero nomen, dilectos fundere Achiuos	a name I bear sweetly, you crush the beloved Achaeans,
et Troum renouare uelis in proelia uires?	and renew the powers of the Trojans in battle?
Haec ita dona refers nobis? sic diligor a te?"	Do you, therefore, bring back these gifts to us?Am I thus loved by you?"
Talibus incusat dictis irata Tonantem	By such angry words she accuses the Thunderer,
inque uicem summi patitur conuicia regis.	and in turn she suffers the high King's abuses.
Tandem interposito lis Ignipotente resedit	At length, by the fire god's intervention,the quarrel settles down
conciliumque simul genitor dimittit Olympi.	and the father of Olympus at once dismisses the council.
Interea sol emenso decedit Olympo	Meanwhile the sun withdraws, passing through Olympus,
et dapibus diui curant sua corpora largis;	and the gods cure their bodies by great feasts:
inde petunt thalamos iucundaque dona quietis.	from there they ask bedchambers, and happy gifts of quiet.
Nox erat et toto fulgebant sidera mundo	It was night, and stars were shining on all the world.
humanumque genus requies diuumque tenebat,	The race of humans and gods had rest,
cum pater omnipotens Somnum uocat atque ita fatur:	when the omnipotent father calls Sleep, and so it is spoken:
"Vade age per tenues auras, lenissime diuum,	"Go! Work through slightest breezes, gentlest of gods,
Argolicique ducis celeri pete castra uolatu	and aim by rapid flightat the camps of the Argive commander.
dumque tuo premitur sopitus pondere dulci,	And when drowsiness is oppressing by your sweet weight,
haec illi mandata refer: cum crastina primum	refer this commandment to him: when at first light
extulerit Titana dies noctemque fugarit,	day will raise up the Titan and drive out night,
cogat in arma uiros incautumque occupet hostem."	let him gather men in arms,and assault the incautious enemy."
Nec mora: Somnus abit leuibusque per aera pennis	No delay: Sleep goes by light feathers through the air,
deuolat in thalamos Agamemnonis: ille sopore	flies down to Agamemnon's bedchamber: he
corpus inundatum leni prostratus habebat.	had a body stretched out, overcome with gentle sleep.
Ad quem sic loquitur curarum operumque leuator:	To whom the lifter of works and cares speaks so:
"Rex Danaum, Atrida, uigila et mandata Tonantis	"King of Danaans, son of Atreus, wake up, and receive
quae tibi iussa simul delatus ab aethere porto,	the Thunderer's commandment,which decree I bring you at once,
accipe: cum primum Titan se emerserit undis,	carried down from the sky:when the Titan will arise from the waves,
fortibus arma iube socios aptare lacertis	command allies to put arms on mighty shoulders,
et petere Iliacos instructo milite campos."	and to attack the Ilians' camps in military order."
Dixit, et has repetit per quas modo uenerat auras.	He spoke, and seeks again these breezesby which he had come.
Interea lucem terris dedit ignea lampas.	While a fiery lamp gives light to the ground,
Conuocat attonitus iussis Pelopeius heros	the Pelopeian hero, astonished by the commandments,
in coetum proceres remque omnibus ordine pandit:	calls the nobles together in assembly,and reveals the matter to all by rank:
cuncti promittunt socias in proelia uires	all promise sharing forces in battle
hortanturque ducem. Quorum rex fortia dictis	and they urge on the leader. The King, praising mighty hearts
pectora collaudans grates agit omnibus aequas.	by words, gives equal thanks to all.
Hic tunc Thersites, quo non deformior alter	This Thersites, then, than whom no other more deformed
uenerat ad Troiam nec lingua proteruior ulli,	came to Troy, nor any tongue bolder,
bella gerenda negat patriasque hortatur ad oras	refuses to wage war, and urges them to return again
uertere iter, quem consiliis illustris Vlixes	to the fatherlands' shores. Ulysses of illustrious counsel
correptum dictis sceptro percussit eburno.	strikes him with an ivory staff, correcting his words.
Tum uero ardescit conceptis litibus ira:	Then fury truly rages, conceiving quarrels:
uix telis caruere manus, ad sidera clamor	hardly a hand lacks a spear, the clamor is taken
tollitur et cunctos pugnandi corripit ardor.	to the stars, and fire for fighting sweeps away all.
Tandem sollertis prudentia Nestoris aeuo	At length, by the cleverness of Nestor's aged wisdom,
compressam miti sedauit pectore turbam	he settled the compressed crowd by a gentle heart,
admonuitque duces dictis responsa recordans	and admonished the leaders by words,remembering a response
temporis illius, quo uisus in Aulide serpens	of that time in Aulis when he had seen a serpent
consumpsit uolucrum bis quattuor arbore fetus	devour twice four bird chicks in a tree,
atque ipsam inualido pugnantem corpore contra	and it added the mother to the death of the chicks,
addidit extremo natorum funere matrem.	her fighting with weak body against him to the end.
Tunc "sic deinde" senex "moneo remoneboque, Achiui:	Then the old man said,"Thus from there, I warn and will remind, Achaeans:
in decimo labor est, Calchas quem dixerat, anno,	the labor which Calchas spoke of is in the tenth year,
quo caderet Danaum uictricibus Ilion armis."	in which Ilion will fallby the victorious arms of the Danaans.
Assensere omnes, laudatur Nestoris aetas	All assenting, the long life of Nestor is praised,
conciliumque simul dimittitur. Arma parari	and the council at once is dismissed. The leader commands
dux iubet atque animos aptare et pectora pugnae.	arms to be readied, souls and hearts to prepare for battle.
Postera lux tacitas ut primum dispulit umbras	Next, as light had first dispelled silent shadows
et nitidum Titan radiis caput extulit undis,	and Titan had raised a shining head from the waves by rays,
protinus armari socios iubet acer Atrides	at once, bitter Atrides commands allies to be armed,
et petere Iliacos instructo milite campos.	and to attack the Ilian camps in military order.
Vos mihi nunc, Musae - quid enim non ordine nostis? -,	You Muses, bring back now to me- for what do you not know in order? -
nomina clara ducum clarosque referte parentes	famous names of leaders and famous ancestors
et dulces patrias: nam sunt haec munera uestra.	and sweet fatherlands: for these are your gifts.
Dicamus quot quisque rates ad Pergama duxit	Let us say who led ships to Pergamam, and how many,
et coeptum peragamus opus, sitque auctor Apollo	and let us carry the work begun through to the end,and may Apollo be the author,
aspiretque libens operi per singula nostro.	and, willing, breathe upon each work of ours.
Peneleos princeps et bello Leitus acer,	Prince Peneleos and Leitus sharp to war,
Arcesilaus atrox Prothoenorque Cloniusque	savage Arcesilaus, and Prothoenor, and Clonius
Boeoti decies quinas egere carinas	lead fifty ships of Boeotia,
et tumidos ualido pulsarunt remige fluctus.	and by strong rower beat the swelling waves.
Inde Mycenaeis Agamemnon moenibus ortus,	From there Agamemnon,rising from Mycenae's fortifications,
quem sibi bellatrix delegit Graecia regem,	whom warlike Greece chose as king for itself,
centum egit plenas armato milite puppes;	led a hundred ships full of armed soldiery; 
et bis tricenis Menelai nauibus ardor	and the ardor of Menelaus twice thirty ships
insequitur totidemque ferox Agapenoris ira;	follow, and fierce, angry Agapenoris the same; 
quos iuxta fidus sollerti pectore Nestor	beside which, faithful Nestor of wise heart,
consilioque potens gemina cum prole suorum	and mighty in counsel, with his twin offspring,
it ter tricenis munitus in arma carinis.	comes fortified in thrice thirty armed keels.
At Schedius uirtute potens et Epistrophus ingens,	Then Schedius, mighty in power, and giant Epistrophus,
gloria Myrmidonum, saeui duo robora belli,	glory of the Myrmidons, two savages of strengths for war,
longa quaterdenis pulsarunt aequora proris	beat long waters with forty prows; 
et bis uicenas Polypoetes atque Leonteus	and Polypoetes and Leonteus with twice twenty
instruxere rates ornatas milite forti.	decorated ships fit out by strong soldiery.
Euryalus Sthenelusque duces et fortis in armis	Leaders Euryalus and Sthenelus, and Tydides,
Tydides ualido pulsarunt remige pontum:	strong in arms, beat the sea by a mighty oar:
bis quadragenas onerarunt milite puppes;	twice forty ships were burdened by soldiery; 
Ascalaphusque potens et Ialmenus, acer uterque,	Mighty Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, both severe,
ter denas ualido complerunt remige naues	furnished thrice ten ships by a mighty oar; 
et bis uicenas Locrum fortissimus Aiax	and most mighty Ajax of Locrus prepared
instruxit puppes totidemque Euhaemone natus,	twice twenty ships, and Euhamone's son the same,
quos iuxta Graium murus comitatur Achilles	which rest beside Achilles, wall of the Greeks,
cum quinquaginta materna per aequora uectus.	with fifty, borne by maternal waters.
Thessalici iuuenes Phidippus et Antiphus ibant	Phidippus and Antiphus, youths of Thessaly, came
altaque ter denis pulsarunt aequora proris	and beat the deep seas with thrice ten ships.
et tribus assumptis ratibus secat aequora Teucer	And taking up three ships, Teucer divides the seas; 
Tlepolemusque nouem Rhodius, quos uiribus acer	Tlepomenus of Rhodius nine, whose severe strengths
Eumelus sequitur, minus una naue profectus	Eumelus follows, setting out in one less ship
quam duxit Telamone satus Salaminius Aiax.	than Ajax of Salaminius led, sprung of Telamon.
Ast Prothous Magnes Tenthredone natus et una	And yet Magnesian Prothous, son of Tenthredon
Euboeae magnis Elephenor finibus ortus	and Elephenor, sprung of the great borders of Euboea, one,
Dulichiusque Meges, animisque insignis et armis,	and Meges of Dulichius, conspicuous both in soul and arms,
Aetola de gente Thoas Andraemone natus,	of Aetolan nationality, Thoas, born of Andraemonus,
hi quadragenas omnes duxere carinas;	all these led forty keels; 
et bis sex Ithaci naues sollertia duxit,	and the cunning one of Ithaca led twice six ships,
quem sequitur totidem ratibus Telamonius Aiax,	whom Telamonian Ajax followswith the same number of ships,
egregia uirtute potens; simul horrida Guneus	mighty with terrific strength;  likewise, terrifying Guneus
ire bis undenis temptabat in arma carinis.	attempted to go in arms in twice eleven keels.
Idomeneus et Meriones, Cretaeus uterque,	Idomeneus and Meriones, both of Crete,
bis quadragenis muniti nauibus ibant;	went in twice forty fortified ships; 
et totidem puppes clara de gente Menestheus	and Menestheus the Athenian, of famous nation, led
duxit Athenaeus, quot uiribus ambit Achilles;	the same number of ships as Achilles solicited of forces; 
Amphimachusque ferox et Thalpius, Elide nati,	and fierce Amphimachus and Thalpius, born of Elis,
et clara uirtute Polyxenus atque Diores,	and Polyxenus of famous strength, and Diores,
hi bis uicenas onerarunt milite puppes.	these weighed down twice twenty ships by soldiery.
Protesilaus agit totidem fortisque Podarces	Protesilaus leads the same number, and strong Podarces,
instructas puppes, quot duxit Oileos Aiax;	prepared ships, as many as Oileus Ajax led; 
et septem Poeante satus tulit arma carinis,	and the one sprung of Poeas took seven armed keels,
quem sequitur iuxta Podalirius atque Machaon,	whom Podalirius followed beside, and Machaon,
altaque ter denis sulcarunt aequora proris.	and they plowed the deep seas by twice ten prows.
His ducibus Graiae Troiana ad litora puppes	By these Greek leaders, ships came to Trojan shores:
bis septem uenere minus quam mille ducentae.	twice seven less than one thousand, two hundred.
Iamque citi appulerant classes camposque tenebant,	And already the ranks had driven quickly,and held the fields,
cum pater ad Priamum mittit Saturnius Irim,	when the Saturnian father sends Iris to Priam,
quae doceat fortes uenisse ad bella Pelasgos.	who may show that the mighty Pelasgiansto have come to war.
Nec mora: continuo iussu capit arma parentis	No delay: immediately by the father's order,
Priamides Hector totamque in proelia pubem	Hector, son of Priam, takes armsand all the young men into battle.
festinare iubet portisque agit agmen apertis.	He commands them to hurry,and makes a battle line by the open gates.
Cui fulgens auro cassis iuuenile tegebat	The flashing of the youth's golden helmet covered
omni parte caput, munibat pectora thorax	every part of the head, a breastplate fortified the chest,
et clipeus laeuam, dextram decorauerat hasta	and a shield decorated the left arm, a spear the right; 
ornabatque latus mucro; simul alta nitentes	and he adorned the side by a sword,likewise shining brightly; 
crura tegunt ocreae, quales decet Hectoris esse.	greaves cover legs, which are fitting for Hector to use.
Hunc sequitur forma melior, tunc fortis in armis,	A handsomer form, then, follows this man in mighty arms,
belli causa Paris, patriae funesta ruina,	Paris, cause of war, deadly ruin of his fatherland,
Deiphobusque Helenusque simul fortisque Polites	and Deiphobus and Helenus together and mighty Polites
et sacer Aeneas, Veneris certissima proles,	and holy Aeneas, most certain offspring of Venus,
Archelochusque Acamasque ferox Antenore creti;	and Archelochus and fierce Acamas, born of Antenor; 
nec non et proles generosa Lycaonis ibat	and indeed the offspring of noble Lycaonia came,
Pandarus et magnae Glaucus uirtutis in armis	Pandarus and great Glaucus, mighty in arms,
Amphiusque et Adrastus et Asius atque Pylaeus.	and Amphius, and Adrastus, and Asius, and Pylaeus.
Ibat et Amphimachus Nastesque, insignis uterque,	Amphimachus also came, and Nastes, each notable,
magnanimique duces Odiusque et Epistrophus ingens	and the great leaders Odius and giant Epistrophus,
Euphemusque ferox clarusque aetate Pyraechmes,	and fierce Euphemus and Pyraechmes, famous at the time,
cum quibus et Mesthles atque Antiphus et bonus armis	with whom also were Mesthles and Antiphus,also good in arms; 
Hippothous uenere Acamasque et Pirous una,	Hippothous and Acamas and Pirous came together; 
Arsinooque sati Chromiusque atque Ennomus, ambo	Chromius and Ennomus, seed of Arsino, both
florentes aetate uiri, quos Phorcus et ingens	flourishing in powerful maturity, whom Phorcus and giant
Ascanius sequitur, simul et Iouis inclita proles	Ascanius follow, and likewise Jove's famous offspring,
Sarpedon claraque satus tellure Coroebus.	Sarpedon, and Coroebus, sprung from famous ground.
His se defendit ducibus Neptunia Troia	By these leaders Neptunian Troy defended itself
uicissetque dolos Danaum, ni fata fuissent.	and may conquer the Danaans' deceits, were the fates not so.
Iamque duae stabant acies fulgentibus armis,	And already the two battle lineswere standing in flashing arms
cum Paris, exitium Troiae funestaque flamma,	when Paris, destroyer of Troy and calamitous flame,
armatum aduerso Menelaum ex agmine cernit	perceives Menelaus armed, in the opposing battle line; 
seque uelut uiso perterritus angue recepit	and he kept himself backlike one terrified by the sight of a snake,
ad socios amens. Quem postquam turpiter Hector	frantic before allies. Hector, after he sees him shamefully
confusum terrore uidet: "O dedecus - inquit -	overcome by terror, says: "O, shameful one,
"aeternum patriae generisque infamia nostri,	eternal shame of our fatherland and race,
terga refers? At non dubitabas hospitis olim	do you turn the back? But formerly, you didn't hesitate
expugnare toros, cuius nunc defugis arma	to fight against the wedding bedof the host whose arms you now flee,
uimque times. Vbi sunt uires, ubi cognita nobis	and you fear violence?Where are the strengths, where is the recognition to us
ludorum quondam uaria in certamina uis est?	of the one-time force of various games in competition?
Hic animos ostende tuos: nihil adiuuat armis	Show your spirits here: nobility of form helps
nobilitas formae: duro Mars milite gaudet.	nothing in arms: Mars rejoices in a harsh soldier.
Dum iaceas in amore tuo, nos bella geremus	While you lie down in your love, we wage war,
scilicet et nostrum fundemus in hoste cruorem.	and certainly will pour out our gore among the enemy.
Aequius aduersis tecum concurrat in armis	Let the energetic son of Atreus come against you
impiger Atrides, spectet Danaumque Phrygumque	in equal arms;  let the people of Danaans and Phrygians
depositis populus telis. Vos, foedere iuncto,	watch, putting away spears. You both, joined in a pact,
aduersas conferte manus, decernite ferro."	come together against each other by hand. Decide by iron!"
Dixit. Quem contra paucis Priameius heros:	He spoke. Against whom the Priameic herospoke by few words
"Quid nimis indignis" - inquit - "me uocibus urges,	"Why do you urge me," he said, "by too indignant words,
o patriae, germane, decus? Nam nec mihi coniunx	O brother, glory of the fatherland?For a spouse and depraved luxury
prauaque luxuria est potior uirtutis honore	isn't better to me than the honor of forces, either,
nec uires temptare uiri dextramque recuso,	nor do I refuse to testthe strengths and right hand of the man,
dummodo uictorem coniunx cum pace sequatur."	provided that the spouse may follow the victor with peace."
Dicta refert Hector: placuit sententia Grais.	Hector brings back the statement.The sentence pleased the Greeks.
Protinus accitur Priamus sacrisque peractis	At once, Priam is summonedand, sacrifices carried through,
foedera iunguntur. Post haec discedit uterque	agreements are yoked. After this, each withdraws,
depositis populus telis campusque patescit.	the people laying down spears, and the plain lay empty.
Interea toto procedit ab agmine Troum	Meanwhile, beautiful Alexandercomes out from the Trojan line,
pulcher Alexander, clipeoque insignis et hasta.	with a distinguished shield and spear.
Quem contra paribus fulgens Menelaus in armis	Against whom, bright Menelaus stood in equal arms,
constitit et: "Tecum mihi sint certamina - dixit -	and said, "Let the contests with you be with me,
"nec longum nostra laetabere coniuge, quae te	nor will you long enjoy our spouse, who soon
mox raptum ire gemet, tantummodo Iuppiter adsit."	will moan to see you taken away,if only Jupiter be at hand."
Dixit et aduersum se concitat acer in hostem.	He spoke and, bitter, throws himself against the enemy.
Ille uirum forti uenientem reppulit ictu	He repelled the man coming on by a strong blow
seque gradu celeri recipit longeque frementem	and withdraws himself by a quick step,and raging from afar,
hastam deinde iacit, quam deuitauit Atrides	throws the spear from there, which Atrides avoided; 
inque uicem misso fixisset corpora telo	and he in turn would have pierced the body
praedonis Phrygii, ni uastum ferrea pectus	of the Phrygian rapist by thrown javelin,had not the vast chest of the man
texisset lorica uiri septemplice tergo.	been covered by a seven-layered coat of mailwith iron behind.
Insequitur iuxta clamor; tum aduersus uterque	Clamor follows along: and then each adversary
constitit et galeam galea terit et pede plantam	stood, and helmet scrapes helmet and sole joins
coniungit stridetque mucro mucrone corusco;	to foot, and sword strikes flashing sword; 
corpus collectum tegitur fulgentibus armis.	body covered by a collection of shining arms -
Non aliter fortes nitida de coniuge tauri	Not unlike strong bulls wage war for a bright mate
bella gerunt uastisque replent mugitibus auras.	and fill the breezes with vast moos.
Atque diu rigido captabant corpora ferro,	And for a long time they tried taking bodies by rigid iron,
cum memor Atrides raptae sibi coniugis instat	when Atrides, remembering to himselfhis stolen wife, presses
Dardaniumque premit iuuenem. Mox ense rigente	and overwhelms the Dardanian youth.Then while he is falling backward
cedentem retro dum desuper appetit hostem,	he assails the enemy from above by a rigid blade,
splendidus extremas galeae percussus ad oras	a splendid blow to the outside edges of the helmet.
dissiluit mucro; gemuerunt agmina Graium.	His sword shattered;  the line of Greeks moaned.
Tum uero ardescit, quamuis manus ense carebat,	Then indeed the hand blazes up,however much it lacked a blade,
et iuuenem arrepta prosternit casside uictor	and the victor strikes the youth down, grabbing the helmet,
ad socios traheretque, et, ni caligine caeca	and drags him to the allies,and, if Cytherea does not cover the man
texisset Cytherea uirum subiectaque mento	by the blindness of gloom,and had broken the strong chains,
fortia rupisset laxatis uincula nodis,	the chin subjected, and loosening the knots,
ultimus ille dies Paridi foret. Abstrahit auro	that day would have been the last of Paris.Menelaus takes him away
fulgentem galeam secum Menelaus et ardens	with the shining golden helmet, and furious,
in medios mittit proceres rursumque recurrit	throws it among the nobles, and again runs back,
et magnam ualidis contorsit uiribus hastam	and hurled a great spear with mighty strengths
in cladem Phrygii, sua quem Venus eripit hosti	in the Phrygian's defeat,whom Venus snatches away from the enemy,
et secum in thalamos defert testudine cultos.	and carries back with herinto cultic bedchambers of turtle-shell.
Ipsa dehinc Helenam muris accersit ab altis	Next, she fetches Helen from the high walls
Dardanioque suos Paridi deducit amores.	and leads her down to her lusts for Dardanian Paris.
Quem tali postquam conspexit uoce locutast:	Whom, after she has seen such, she says by voice:
"Venisti mea flamma, Paris, superatus ab armis	"Have you come, my flame Paris, overwhelmed by the arms
coniugis antiqui? Vidi puduitque uidere,	of the former spouse? I saw, and it shamed me to see
arreptum cum te traheret uiolentus Atrides	you taken, when the violent Atrides dragged you,
Iliacoque tuos foedaret puluere crines.	and dirtied your hair by Ilian dust,
Nostraque - me miseram! - timui ne Doricus ensis	and ours - my misery! - I feared lest the Doric blade
oscula discuteret; totus mihi, mente reuincta,	had cut down kisses! All to me! Bound fast in mind,
fugerat ore color sanguisque reliquerat artus.	color fled my face and blood abandoned my limbs.
Quis te cum saeuo contendere suasit Atrida?	Who persuaded you to fight with the savage son of Atreus?
An nondum uaga fama tuas peruenit ad aures	Had no wandering rumor yet come through to your ears
de uirtute uiri? Moneo ne rursus inique	of the man's strength? I warn you not to try again wickedly
illius tua fata uelis committere dextrae."	to commit your fate to his right arm."
Dixit. Tum largis perfudit fletibus ora.	She spoke. Then she flooded his face with large tears.
Tristis Alexander: "Non me superauit Atrides,	Sorrowful Alexander : "Atrides didn't overwhelm me,
o meus ardor" - ait - "sed castae Palladis ira.	O my love" - he said - "yet the wrath of chaste Pallas.
Mox illum nostris succumbere turpiter armis	Soon you will see him succumb shamefully to our arms,
aspicies aderitque meo Cytherea labori."	and Cytherea will be near to my labor."
Post haec amplexus per mutua corpora iunctis	After this, embracing each other, bodies joined,
incubuit membris Cygneidos; illa soluto	he lay in the Swan-born's members; she, by opened vulva,
accepit flammas gremio Troiaeque suasque.	received the flames of both Troy and herself.
Interea toto Menelaus in agmine Troum	During all, Menelaus seeks Alexander
quaerit Alexandrum uictorque huc fertur et illuc.	in the Trojan battle line,and the victor struts here and there.
Quem frater socias acuens in bella cateruas	His brother helps him, spurring on the allied troops in war,
adiuuat et forti pulsos Phrygas increpat ore	and rebukes the beaten Phrygians by a strong mouth,
seruarique iubet leges Helenamque reposcit.	and commands the laws to be observed,and demands Helen back.
Dumque inter sese proceres certamen haberent,	And while the nobleswere having a contest among themselves,
concilium omnipotens habuit regnator Olympi	the omnipotent ruler of Olympus had a council.
foederaque intento turbauit Pandarus arcu,	Pandarus troubled the truces, pointing a bow,
te, Menelae, petens; laterique uolatile telum	aiming at you, Menelaus; and the flying arrow cuts into the side
incidit et tunicam ferro squamisque rigentem	and penetrates the tunic, rigid with an iron plate.
dissecat. Excedit pugna gemebundus Atrides	Atrides, moaning, leaves the fight
castraque tuta petit, quem doctus ab arte paterna	and seeks the guarded camps, whom, treated by paternal art
Paeoniis curat iuuenis Podalirius herbis,	of Paeonian herbs, he is healed by the youth Podalirius.
itque iterum in caedes horrendaque proelia uictor.	And the victor goes againinto slaughter and horrendous battle.
Armauit fortes Agamemnonis ira Pelasgos	Agamemnon's fury arms the Pelasgians
et dolor in pugnam cunctos communis agebat.	and pain drove all together to fight.
Bellum ingens oritur multumque utrimque cruoris	Gigantic war is rising, and much gore is shed
funditur et totis sternuntur corpora campis	on both sides, and bodies are scattered over all the field,
inque uicem Troumque cadunt Danaumque cateruae	and in turn troops of Trojans and Danaans fall,
nec requies datur ulla uiris: sonat undique Mauors	nor is rest given to any man: Mars shouts on every side,
telorumque uolant cunctis e partibus imbres.	and showers of spears fly from all parts.
Occidit Antilochi rigido demersus in umbras	The son of Thalysias falls by the rigid blade of Antilochus,
ense Thalysiades optataque lumina linquit.	and, submerged in shadows,he abandons the longed-for lights.
Inde manu forti Graiorum terga prementem	From there, the backs of the Greekspressed by a mighty hand,
occupat Anthemione satum Telamonius Aiax	Telamonian Ajax seizes a native of Anthemion,
et praedurato transfixit pectora telo:	and pierces the chest with a hardened spear:
purpuream uomit ille animam cum sanguine mixtam,	he vomits purple, soul mixed with blood; 
ora rigat moriens. Tum magnis Antiphus hastam	he drenches the face, dying.Then Antiphus hurls a spear by great
uiribus aduersum conatus corpore toto	strengths, the attempt of all the body,
torquet in Aeaciden; telumque errauit ab hoste	against Aeacides ;  and the spear erred from the enemy
inque hostem cecidit, transfixit et inguina Leucon:	and fell among the enemies,and pierced Leucon in the groin:
concidit infelix prostratus uulnere forti	the unhappy man falls, prostrate by a mighty wound
et carpit uirides moribundus dentibus herbas.	and dying, chews the green grass by teeth.
Impiger Atrides casu commotus amici	Energetic Atrides, moved by his friend's fate,
Democoonta petit teloque aduersa trabali	aims against Democoon by a wooden spear,
tempora transadigit uaginaque horridus ensem	and pierces through the temples.The grim man snatches away the sword
eripit; ille suis moriens resupinus in armis	from the scabbard;  dying in arms, lying on the back,
concidit et terram moribundo uertice pulsat.	he beats and pulsates the earthby the crown of his dying head.
Iamque Amarynciden saxi deiecerat ictu	And already Pirous son of Imbrases had brought down
Pirous Imbrasides dederatque silentibus umbris;	the son of Amaryncius by the blow of a rock,and given him to silent shadows; 
dumque auidus praedae iuuenem spoliare parabat,	and while the man, avid for plunder,prepared to strip the youth,
desuper hasta uenit dextra librata Thoantis	a spear comes from above,hurled by the right hand of Thoas,
perque uiri scapulas animosaque pectora transit;	and passes through the man'sshoulders and courageous chest; 
in uultus ruit ille suos calidumque cruorem	he fell on his face, and vomits hot blood
ore uomit stratusque super sua palpitat arma.	by mouth, and shudders, laid out over his weapons.
Sanguine Dardanii manabant undique campi,	The Dardan plains flowed with blood on every side,
manabant amnes passim. Pugnabat ubique	the streams flowed everywhere. Everywhere the armies
immixtis ardens amborum exercitus armis	of both fought burning with mixed arms,
et modo Troianis uirtus, modo crescit Achiuis	and now the strength of the Trojans,now that of the Achaeans grows
laetaque per uarios petitur uictoria casus.	and joyous victory is sought by various chances.
Hic postquam Danaum longe cedentia uidit	Here, after Tydides saw the Danaans' front
agmina Tydides tumidumque increscere Martem,	retreating far, swollen Mars increasing,
in medias acies, qua plurimus imminet hostis,	he rushes in among the battle lines,where he threatens many
irruit et uersas prosternit caede phalangas;	of the enemy, and, opposing,cuts down formations by slaughter.
huc illuc ensemque ferox hastamque coruscat.	The fierce one flashes sword and spear here and there.
Bellica Pallas adest flagrantiaque ignibus arma	Warlike Pallas is present, and arms blazing in fires,
adiuuat atque animos iuueni uiresque ministrat.	she helps the youth's spirits, and ministers forces.
Ille, boum ueluti uiso grege saeua leaena,	He, like a savage lioness seeing a herd of oxen
quam stimulat ieiuna fames, ruit agmina contra	who, famine-driven, fasting, rushes in against the line
et prostrata necat uesano corpora dente,	and kills by frenzied tooth the fallen bodies,
sic ruit in medios hostes Calydonius heros,	so the Calydonian hero rushes into the enemies' midst
uirginis armigerae monitis et numine tutus.	admonished of the arms-bearing virgin and divine will.
Conuersi dant terga Phryges, fugientibus ille	Turning, the Phrygians give the backs, fleeing.
instat et exstructos morientum calcat aceruos.	He pursues and tramples piled up heaps of the dying.
Dumque ferit sternitque uiros, uidet ecce Daretis	And while he strikes and scatters men,he sees, look! The sons of Dares
aduerso stantes furibundus in agmine natos,	standing opposite, raging in the battle line,
Phegeaque Idaeumque simul; quem cuspide Phegeus	Phegeus and Idaeus together;  Phegeus attacks him first
occupat ante graui, sed uulnera depulit umbo	by a heavy lance, yet he drives away wounds by the shield
uitatumque solo ferrum stetit. Haud mora: totis	and avoided entirely, it stood only in the ground.No delay: Tydides
ingentem torquet Tydides uiribus hastam	hurls a giant spear with all his strengths,
transadigitque uiri pectus: pars cuspidis ante	and pierces through the man's chest:part of the spear hangs out before
eminet et prodit scapulis pars altera fossis.	and the other part thrusts out the stabbed shoulders.
Hunc ubi fundentem calidum de pectore flumen	The brother saw where this man was,pouring out a hot flow from his chest
uersantemque oculos animamque per ora uomentem	and rolling the eyesand vomiting the soul out through the mouth.
conspexit frater, stricto celer aduolat ense	He flies quickly to close by sword
germanique cupit fatorum exsistere uindex.	and wants to be judge of his brother's fates.
Sed neque uim saeui nec fortia sustinet arma	Yet neither savage force nor mighty arms sustain
Tydidae contraque tamen defendere temptat.	against Tydides, and nevertheless he tries to defend.
Vt uolucris, discerpta sui cum corpora nati	As a bird, when the body of her chick is torn apart,
accipitrem laniare uidet nec tendere contra,	she sees the hawk mangle,yet she can neither attempt against it
auxilium neque ferre suo ualet anxia nato	nor bring help, anxious for the chick,
quodque potest, leuibus plaudit sua pectora pennis,	and what she can do,she beats her breast with light feathers,
sic hostem Idaeus germani caede superbum	so Idaeus sees the proud enemy,bloody by the killing of his brother
spectat atrox miseroque nequit succurrere fratri	nor is he able to run to the wretched brother's aid
et, nisi cessisset, dextra cecidisset eadem.	and, unless he had stopped,he would have fallen by the same right hand.
Nec minus in Teucros armis furit alter Atrides	Nor less the other son of Atreusrages in arms against the Teucros
insequiturque acies et ferro funera miscet.	and the battle line follows, and he mixes deaths with iron.
Obuius huic fatis occurrit ductus iniquis	And leading the way, unhappy Odius meets
infelix Odius, quem uastae cuspidis ictu	this dismal fate;  by the blow of a vast lance,
sternit et ingenti scapulas transuerberat hasta.	Menelaus lays him outand pierces through the giant shoulders by spear.
Hinc petit Idomeneus aduersa parte ruentem	Here Idomeneus seeks Phaestus of Maeonidus,
Maeoniden Phaestum, cuius post funera laetus	rushing in on the opposing part, after whose death, happy,
et Strophio genitum Stygias demittit ad umbras.	he also sends the son of Strophius down to Stygian shadows.
Meriones Phereclum librata percutit hasta	Meriones strikes Phereclus by a hurled spear
Pedaeumque Meges. Tum uastis horridus armis	and Meges kills Pedaeum. Then, grim by vast arms,
Eurypylus gladio uenientem Hypsenora fundit	Eurypylus lays advancing Hypsenora low by sword,
et pariter uita iuuenem spoliauit et armis.	and he plundered the youth of both life and arms.
Parte alia uolitat sinuoso Pandarus arcu	In another part, Pandarus flies over by bending bow
Tydidenque oculis immensa per agmina quaerit;	and seeks Tydides through the battle line with intense eye.
quem postquam Troum sternentem corpora uidit,	After he sees him scattering the Trojans' bodies,
horrida contento derexit spicula cornu	he directed grim arrows by a stretched bow,
et summas umeri destringit acumine partes.	and strips off the topmost partof his shoulder by sharpened arrow.
Tum uero ardescit iuuenis Calydonius ira	Then indeed, the Calydonian youth burns with anger,
in mediasque acies animosi more leonis	and throws himselfinto the midst of the line like an angry lion,
fertur et Astynoum, magnum quoque Hypirona fundit,	and cuts down Astynous and great Hypiron also; 
comminus hunc gladio, iaculo ferit eminus illum;	this one close by he strikes by sword; him at a distance by spear; 
inde premit Polyidon Abantaque cuspide forti	from there he presses Polyidus and Abantaby a mighty lance,
et notum bello Xanthum uastumque Thoonem.	and Xanthus, noted in war, and vast Thoones.
Post hos infestus Chromiumque et Echemmona telo	After these, the hostile man drives awayboth Chromius and Echemmona
proturbat celeri pariterque ad Tartara mittit.	by arrow, and sends both rapidly to Tartarus.
Tu quoque Tydidae prostratus, Pandare, dextra	You likewise, Pandarus,prostrate by the right hand of Tydides
occidis, infelix, accepto uulnere tristi,	killed, unhappy man, receiving a sad wound,
dextera qua naris fronti coniungitur imae;	where the right side of the noseis joined to the lower forehead; 
dissipat et cerebrum galeae cum parte reuulsum	and he splatters the brain,torn away with part of the helmet; 
ossaque confossa spargit Tydideus ensis.	and Tydides' sword scatters the stabbed-through bones.
Iamque manum Aeneas simul et Calydonius heros	And now Aeneas and the Calydonian hero had brought
contulerant, iactis inter se comminus hastis;	hand together, throwing spearsbetween themselves at close quarters; 
undique rimabant inimico corpora ferro,	and on all sides they sought the bodies by hostile iron,
et modo cedebant retro, modo deinde coibant.	and now moved back, now from there came together.
Postquam utrique diu steterant nec uulnera magnus	And at length after both stood, nor did great Tydides
qua daret infesto Tydides ense uidebat,	see where he could give a wound by hostile sword,
saxum ingens medio quod forte iacebat in agro,	he took up a giant stone which layby chance in the middle of the field,
bis seni quod uix iuuenes tellure mouerent,	which hardly twice six youths could move from the ground,
sustulit et magno conamine misit in hostem.	and threw it by great effort at the enemy.
Ille ruit prostratus humi cum fortibus armis,	He fell prostrate on the ground with mighty arms,
quem Venus aetherias genetrix delapsa per auras	whom mother Venuscoming down through the skies' breezes
accipit et nigra corpus caligine condit.	takes, and hides the body in a black darkness.
Non tulit Oenides animo nebulasque per ipsas	Oenides did not take this agreeably,and threw himself
fertur et in Venerem flagrantibus irruit armis,	through the very clouds,and intrudes against Venus with flagrant arms,
et neque quem demens ferro petat inspicit aruis	and frenzied, he seesno one on the field whom he may attack
caelestemque manum mortali uulnerat hasta.	and a mortal's spear wounds a divine hand.
Icta petit caelum terris Cytherea relictis	Wounded, leaving earth behind, Cytherea aims at the sky
atque ibi sidereae queritur sua uulnera matri.	and there complains of her wounds to her starry mother.
Dardanium Aenean seruat Troianus Apollo	Trojan Apollo saves Dardanian Aeneas
accenditque animos iterumque ad bella reducit.	and inflames his spirits, and brings him back again to war.
Vndique consurgunt acies et puluere caelum	On all sides the lines surge and the sky is concealed
conditur horrendisque sonat clamoribus aether.	by dust, and heaven sounds with horrendous cries.
Hic alius rapido deiectus in aequora curru	Here, one is thrown down to the plains in a swift chariot
proteritur pedibusque simul calcatur equorum	and crushed and trampled at once by the hooves of horses,
atque alius uolucri traiectus corpora telo	and another, body pierced through by a flying spear
quadrupedis tergo pronus ruit; illius ense	fell prone on his back from the horse;  one whose head
deiectum longe caput a ceruice cucurrit;	rolled on, thrown far from the neck by a sword; 
hic iacet exanimis fuso super arma cerebro:	this one falls dead, brain splattered over arms; 
sanguine manat humus, campi sudore madescunt.	the soil flows with blood, fields wet with sweat.
Emicat interea Veneris pulcherrima proles	Meanwhile, the offspringof most beautiful Venus appears suddenly
densaque Graiorum premit agmina nudaque late	and presses the Greeks' dense lines, and mows wide
terga metit gladio funestaque proelia miscet.	naked backs by the sword, and mixes deadly battle.
Nec cessat spes una Phrygum fortissimus Hector	Nor does mightiest Hector, one hope of the Phrygians, cease
sternere caede uiros atque agmina uertere Graium.	to scatter men cut down,and overturn the Greeks' battle lines.
Vt lupus in campis pecudes cum uidit apertis	As a wolf in a field when he sees sheep exposed
(non actor gregis ipse, comes non horrida terret	(he fears neither the flock's shepherd,nor the agitated crowd
turba canum), fremit esuriens et neglegit omnes	of dogs), he rages, hungry, and ignores all,
in mediosque greges auidus ruit, haut secus Hector	and rushes insatiable among the flocks,by no means different, Hector
inuadit Danaos et territat ense cruento.	attacks the Danaans and terrifies by a wounding sword.
Deficiunt Graiorum acies, Phryges acrius instant	The Greek lines falter, the Phrygians push forward sharply
attolluntque animos: geminat uictoria uires.	and lift spirits: victory doubles forces.
Vt uidit socios infesto cedere Marte,	As he sees allies fall by hostile Mars,
rex Danaum sublimis equo uolat agmina circum	the Danaan king, high on horseback,flies around the battle lines
hortaturque duces animosque in proelia firmat.	and urges on the leaders, and strengthens souls in battle.
Mox ipse in medios audax se proripit hostes	Soon, the courageous Kingthrows himself among the enemies
oppositasque acies stricto diuerberat ense.	and divides the opposing lines by drawn sword.
Vt Libycus cum forte leo procul agmina uidit	As when a Libyan lion by chance sees far off lines
laeta boum passim uirides errare per herbas,	of happy cattle to wanderhere and there through green grasses,
attollit ceruice iubas sitiensque cruoris	he lifts up the mane by neck and, thirsty for gore,
in mediam erecto contendit pectore turbam,	he contends by erect chest among the herd,
sic ferus Atrides aduersos fertur in hostes	so fierce Atrides carries himself across into the enemies,
infestasque Phrygum proturbat cuspide turmas.	and drives away by lance the hostile Phrygian columns.
Virtus clara ducis uires accendit Achiuum	His famous strength kindlesthe forces of the Achaean leaders
et spes exacuit languentia militis arma:	and hope makes sharpthe listlessness of the soldiery's arms:
funduntur Teucri, Danai laetantur ouantes.	the Teucri are poured out,the Danaans, rejoicing, are happy.
Tandem hic Aenean immisso tendere curru	At length, this son of Atreus sees Aeneas
conspicit Atrides: stricto concurrere ferro	try to charge by an attacking chariot, iron drawn,
comparat et iaculum, quantum furor ipse mouebat,	and he prepares a spear. So much his fury moved,
uiribus intorquet, quod detulit error ab illo	he hurls it by strengths;  which falling astray from him
pectus in aurigae stomachoque infigitur alto;	is fastened in the chest and stomach of the high charioteer; 
ille ruens ictu media inter lora rotasque	he, falling in the middle by the blow,rolls between whips and wheels
uoluitur et uitam calido cum sanguine fundit.	and pours out the life with hot blood.
Ingemit Aeneas curruque animosus ab alto	Furious Aeneas moansand jumps down from the high chariot,
desilit et ualido Crethona<que> comminus ictu	and by a mighty blow in close quarters
Orsilochumque ferit, quorum post funera uictus	carries off Orilochus and Chrethon,after whose deaths, defeated,
Paphlagonum ductor Menelai concidit armis,	he cuts down Paphlagonus, leader of Menelaus's arms,
Antilochique Mydon. Post hos Iouis inclita proles	and Antilochus kills Mydon.After these, the famous offspring of Jove
Sarpedon bellum funestaque proelia miscet.	Sarpedon mixes war and deadly battle.
Quem contra infelix non aequis dimicat armis	Against him, unhappy Tlepolemus, son of great Hercules,
Tlepolemus magno satus Hercule, sed neque uires	does not divide arms equally, yet neither the strengths
hunc seruare patris nec tot potuere labores,	nor all the labors of the father can save him,
quin caderet tenuemque daret de corpore uitam.	so that he falls and gives the feeble life from the body.
Saucius egreditur medio certamine belli	Wounded, Sarpedon goes outfrom the middle of the battle-front,
Sarpedon fraudisque subit commentor Vlixes	and Ulysses deviser of trickery goes up
et septem iuuenum fortissima corpora fundit.	and pours out seven youths of mightiest bodies.
Hinc pugnat patriae columen Mauortius Hector,	Here, Mars-like Hector fights, ridge-pole of the fatherland,
illinc Tydides: sternuntur utrimque uirorum	there Tydides: and they scatterthe bodies of men on either side
corpora per campos et sanguine prata rigantur.	through the fields,and the meadows are moistened by blood.
Pugnat bellipotens casta cum Pallade Mauors	Mighty-in-war Mars fights with chaste Pallas
ingentemque mouet clipeum, quem sancta uirago	and shakes his giant shield, whom the holy warlike female
egit et extrema percussum cuspide caedit	drove at, and she strikes a blow by the tip of a lance
attonitumque simul caelum petere ipsa coegit.	and forces him to aim at the sky at once, astonished.
Hic ille aetherio queritur sua uulnera regi	There on high he shows the King his wounds
saucius et magni genitoris iurgia suffert.	and, injured, endures the abuses of the great father.
Interea magnis Acamantem uiribus Aiax	Meanwhile, Ajax kills Acamantes by great strengths
interimit uastumque capit Menelaus Adrastum	and Menelaus captures vast Adrastus
et rapit ad classes manibus post terga reuinctis,	and takes him to the ships, hands tied behind the back
ut ui deducat laetos ex hoste triumphos.	that he may lead him back by forcefrom the enemy to joyful triumphs.
Incumbunt Danai, cedit Troiana iuuentus	The Danaans attack, the Trojan youth falls
tergaque nuda tegit. Sensit Mauortius Hector	and covers the naked backs. Mars-like Hector senses
pro Danais pugnare deos ualidasque suorum	the gods fighting for the Danaans, and his men's strengths
uirginis armigerae subduci numine uires	carried way by the divine will of the warlike virgin,
continuoque petit muros Hecubamque uocari	and immediately seeks the wallsand commands Hecuba be called.
imperat et diuae placari numina suadet.	He urges the divinities of the goddess be placated.
Protinus armatas innuptae Palladis arces	At once the unwed women of Ilias climb up
Iliades subeunt: festis altaria sertis	the citadels of armed Pallas:they furnish the altars with woven flowers
exornant caeduntque sacras ex more bidentes.	and kill sacred offerings in the customary manner.
Dumque preces Hecube supplex ad templa Mineruae	And while suppliant Hecubapours out prayers at Minerva's temple,
pro caris genetrix natis et coniuge fundit,	a mother for beloved children and husband,
interea Glaucus stricto decernere ferro	meanwhile Glaucus prepares to decide by drawn iron
cum Diomede parat nomenque genusque roganti	with Diomedes, and asking name and ancestry,
qui sit et unde ferat, magnis cum uiribus hastam	who he may be and where he came from,he attempts to throw a spear
mittere temptabat; temptanti Aetolius heros:	with great forces;  the Aetolian hero urging,
"Quo ruis?" - exclamat - "quae te, scelerate, furentem	"Where are you rushing?" - he cries out -"what raging mind, criminal,
mens agit imparibus mecum concurrere telis?	drives you to fight me with unequal arms?
Hospitis arma uides, Veneris qui uulnere dextram	You see the arms of a host,who struck the right hand of Venus
perculit et summo pupugit certamine Martem.	a wound, and stabbed Mars in high battle.
Pone truces animos infestaque tela coerce."	Set down your wild spirits and restrain hostile weapons.'
Post haec inter se posito certamine pugnae	After this, setting aside between themselvesthe contest of fighting,
commutant clipeos inimicaque proelia linquunt.	they exchange shields, and forsake harmful battle.
Colloquium petit interea fidissima coniunx	Meanwhile, Andromache, most faithful spouse of Hector,
Hectoris Andromache paruumque ad pectora natum	asks for a conversation, and at her breasts
Astyanacta tenet, cuius dum maximus heros	she holds their little child, Astyanax.While the great hero asks
oscula parua petit, subito perterritus infans	his little kisses, the infant, suddenly terrified,
conuertit timidos materna ad pectora uultus	turns his timid face to the mother's breasts,
terribilemque fugit galeam cristamque comantem.	and flees the terrible helmet and plumed crest.
Vtque caput iuuenis posito detexerat aere,	And as the young man uncovered his head,laying aside the bronze,
protinus infantem geminis amplectitur ulnis	he at once embraces the infant with both arms,
attollensque manus: "Precor, o pater optime" - dixit -	and lifting hands: "I pray, O noblest father" - he said -
"ut meus hic, pro quo tua numina, natus, adoro,	"that my child here, for whom I worship your divinities,
uirtutes patrias primis imitetur ab annis."	"may imitate the fathers' virtues from his first years."
Haec ait et portis acies petit acer apertis,	He said these things, and the gates opened,he seeks the bitter battle line,
una deinde Paris. Postquam in certamina uentumst,	with Paris together next. After they come into the struggle
protinus in medium procedit maximus Hector	great Hector at once proceeds into the midst
Graiorumque duces inuictis prouocat armis.	and provokes the Greek leaders by unbeaten arms.
Nec mora: continuo fraudis commentor Vlixes	No delay: at once Ulysses, deviser of trickery,
et ferus Idomeneus et notus gente paterna	and fierce Idomeneus, and Meriones,renowned of paternal nation,
Meriones Graiumque simul dux acer Atrides	and at the same time Atrides, sharp leader of the Greeks
Aiacesque duo <et> claris speciosus in armis	and the two Ajax, handsome in famous arms,
Eurypylus magnoque Thoas Andraemone natus	Eurypylus, and Thoas, born of great Andraecom
quique manum Veneris uiolauit uulnere tristi	and he who wounded the hand of sad Venus
procedunt; aberat nam Troum terror Achilles	advance;  for Achilles, terror of Troy, wasn't there,
et cithara dulci durum lenibat amorem.	and was easing harsh love by sweet guitar.
Ergo ubi deiectis auratam regis Atridae	Therefore, when lots were cast in the golden helmet
sortibus in galeam magnus processerat Aiax,	of King Atrides, great Ajax had come forward.
principio iactis committunt proelia telis:	First they commit to battle, throwing spears; 
mox rigidos stringunt enses et fortibus armis	next they draw rigid blades and by mighty arms
decernunt partesque oculis rimantur apertas	decide, and search by eyes for open places
et modo terga petunt, duros modo fortibus ictus	and now they aim at backs, now repel harsh blows
depellunt clipeis; ingens ad sidera clamor	by mighty shields;  the giant clamor is taken
tollitur et uastis impletur uocibus aer.	to the stars, and the air is filled with vast shouts.
Non sic saetigeri exacuunt feruoribus iras	Not thus bristly boars make sharp angers by furies,
pectoribusque petunt uastis, modo dentibus uncis	and they aim for vast chests now by barbed teeth,
alterni librant gladios et uulnera miscent.	the opponents free swords, and mix wounds.
fortia terga premunt spumantque per ora uicissim;	They press mighty backs, and each foam at the mouth:
fumiferae nubes concretaque fulgura et ignes	clouds of smoke and mixed lightnings and fires
iactantur magnoque implentur murmure siluae.	blaze up, and fill the woods by great complaint.
Tales Priamides ardorque Aiacis in armis	And such is the ardor of Priamides and Ajax in arms.
Tandem animis teloque furens Telamonius Aiax	At length, Telamonian Ajax, furious in spirits and weapons,
insignem bello petit Hectora, quaque patebat	aims at Hector, conspicuous in war,and steers the shining sword
nuda uiri ceruix, fulgentem derigit ensem.	where the man's naked neck lay open.
Ille ictum celeri praeuidit callidus astu	The cunning man sees the blow in advance by quick wit
tergaque summisit ferrumque umbone repellit.	and raises the backs, and repels the iron by shield,
Sed leuis extremas clipei perlabitur oras	Yet he lightly passes over the extreme edge of the shield
ensis et exiguo ceruicem uulnere libat.	by the sword, and grazes the neck by a small wound.
Acrius impugnans rursus consurgit in hostem	Fighting bitterly again, he surges into the enemy.
Priamides nec iam ferro Telamone creatum,	Priamides not now by iron yet by the cast of a great stone
sed magno saxi iactu petit. At ferus Aiax	aims at the offspring of Telamon. And fierce Ajax
ingentem clipeo septemplice reppulit ictum	repels the giant blow by a seven-fold shield,
et iuuenem saxo percussum sternit eodem.	and lays the youth out, struck the same by stone.
Quem leuat exceptum Grais inimicus Apollo	Apollo, enemy of the Greeks, lifts him up
integratque animum; iam rursus ad arma coibant	and makes his soul whole:already again they come together in arms
stringebantque iterum gladios, cum fessus in undas	and drew again swords, when the tired Titan
coeperat igniferos Titan immergere currus	began to submerge the fire-bearing chariots in the waves
noxque subire polum: iuxta mittuntur, utrosque	and night to rise a little: they send men beside
qui dirimant a caede uiros, nec segnius illi	who break up the slaughter from each side,nor sluggish, they
deponunt animos. Tunc bello maximus Hector:	lay down spirits. Then Hector, great in war:
"Quae te terra uirum, qui te genuere parentes?	"What land birthed you,and who are the parents who produced you?
Viribus es proles generosa atque inclita" - dixit.	You are the offspring of generousand celebrated strengths," he said.
At contra se ferre parat Telamonius Aiax:	And across, Telamonian Ajax prepares himself to speak:
"Hesiona de matre uides Telamone creatum,	"You see one sired by Telamon, of mother Hesiona,
nobilis est domus et fama generosa propago."	The house is noble, and the race of generous fame."
Hector, ut Hesionae nomen casusque recordans:	As Hector, remembering the name and case of Hesiona,
"Absistamus" - ait - "sanguis communis utriquest",	said, "Let us withdraw. Common blood is on both sides,"
et prior Aeaciden aurato munerat ense	and first, he makes Aeacides a gift of his golden sword
inque uicem, quo se bellator cinxerat Aiax,	and in turn, receives the notable belt, variously carved,
accipit insignem uario caelamine balteum.	by which warlike Ajax girded himself.
Post haec extemplo Graium Troumque cateruae	Immediately after this, the ranks of Greeks and Trojans
discedunt caelumque tegit nox atra tenebris.	withdraw, and night covers the sky with black shadows.
Implentur dapibus largis Bacchique liquore	They are filled with large mealsand the liquor of Bacchus,
atque auidi placido tradunt sua corpora somno.	and hand over their bodies avidly to peaceful sleep.
Postera cum primum stellas Aurora fugarat,	Afterwards, when Aurora had first driven out the stars,
in coetum uenere Phryges. Tunc maximus Hector	the Phrygians come to council. Then, great Hector
cum sociis memorans hesternae funera caedis	remembering with allies the deaths of yesterday's slaughter
suadet ut inuictis Helene reddatur Achiuis	urges that Helen be return to the unconquered Achaeans.
praedaque quae duros Menelai mulceat ignes	and plunder that might soothe Menelaus's harsh fires,
idque placet cunctis. Tunc saeuo missus Atridae	and it pleases all. Then Idaeus brought the message
pertulit Idaeus Troum mandata; neque ille	of the Trojan mandate to savage Atrides ; he accommodates
aut animum praedae aut dictis accommodat aures,	neither the soul to the plunder nor the ears to the words,
ultro etiam castris Idaeum excedere iussit.	and commands Idaeus to go out beyond the camps.
Paruit is monitis iterumque ad castra reuersus	Admonished, he obeys and despised, turning back again
Troiae contemptum duro se reddit ab hoste.	to the Trojans' camps,he brings himself back from the harsh enemy.
Interea Danai confusi caede suorum	Meanwhile the Danaans,disordered by the slaughter of their own,
ingentes struxere pyras collectaque passim	build giant funeral pyres and, gathering from everywhere,
fortia tradiderunt sociorum corpora flammis.	hand over the mighty bodies of their allies to flames.
Tum renouant fossas et uallum robore cingunt.	Afterwards, they repair the trenches,and surround the palisade with oak.
Vt nitidum Titan radiis patefecerat orbem,	As the Titan brought the shining world to light by its rays,
conuocat in coetum superos Iouis et monet, armis	Jove gathers those above in council, and warns
ne contra sua dicta uelint contendere diui.	that the gods not contend in arms against his word.
Ipse per aetherias caeli delabitur auras	He glides down from the sky through heavenly breezes
umbrosisque simul consedit montibus Idae.	and sits at once on Ida's shady mountains.
Inde acies uidet Iliacas dextraque potenti	From there he sees the Ilian battle lines,and by potent right hand
sustinet auratas aequato pondere lances	holds up the golden scales of equal plates,
fataque dura Phrygum casusque expendit Achiuum	and weighs out the Phrygians' harsh fateand the Achaeans' lot,
et Graium clades grauibus praeponderat armis.	and disaster for the Greeks weighs down by grave arms.
Interea Danaos ingenti concitus ira	Meanwhile, Priamides, stirred up by giant anger,
Priamides agit et totis grauis imminet armis	drives the Danaans,and threatens every part by heavy arms,
unum quippe decus Phrygiae. Turbantur Achiui	one indeed, glory of Phrygia. The Achaeans are troubled
Doricaque ingenti complentur castra tumultu.	and the Dorian camps are filled by giant tumult.
Hortatur socios muris inclusus Atrides	Atrides, shut in by walls, encourages allies
languentesque animos iuuenum in certamina firmat.	and strengthens the youths' wavering spirits in the struggle.
Princeps Tydides fulgens ardentibus armis	First Tydides, shining by burning arms,
per medios hostes immani pondere fertur.	wins by inhuman weight through the enemies' midst.
Hic illi occurrit fatis Agelaus iniquis,	Here Agelaus of ill fate meets him
telum immane manu quatiens, quem maximus heros	shaking a spear by inhuman hand, whom the great hero
occupat et duro medium transuerberat ense.	seizes and stabs through the middle by harsh sword.
Hinc Phrygas Aiacis uastis protectus in armis	Then Teucer, protected by Ajax in vast arms,
Teucer agit spargitque leues in terga sagittas.	attacks the Phrygiansand scatters light arrows in their backs.
Gorgythiona ferum letali uulnere fundit;	He pours out fierce Gorgythion by a lethal wound; 
mox alias acies petit aurigamque superbi	Then he aims at another line, and kills the charioteer
Hectoris obtruncat, quem saxo Troius heros	of proud Hector. The Trojan hero attacks him by a stone
occupat excussoque incautum proterit arcu.	and crushes the incautious man by thrown down bow.
Ast illum fidi rapiunt de caede sodales	But faithful companions take him away from the slaughter
prostratumque leuant. Ruit undique turbidus Hector	and lift up the prostrate body.Stormy Hector destroys from every side
aduersasque acies infesta cuspide terret.	and terrorizes the opposing lines by hostile lance.
Se rursus Danai turbati caede suorum	The Danaan troops in turn, troubled by their slaughter,
conuertunt iterumque leues in castra cateruae	turn themselves back again, and flee quickly into the camps
confugiunt portasque obiecto robore firmant.	and make firm the gates by an oaken beam.
At Phryges obsidunt inclusos aggere Graios	Then the Phrygians besiege the Greeks enclosed by the wall
excubituque premunt muros flammisque coronant.	and keeping watch,they press and crown the walls by flames.
Cetera per campos sternunt sua corpora pubes	Other young men stretch out their bodies through the fields
indulgentque mero curas<que> animosque resoluunt.	and indulge cares by wine and resolve their spirits.
Attoniti Danaum proceres discrimine tanto	The Danaan nobles, astonished by such a crisis,
nec dapibus releuant animos nec corpora curant,	neither ease souls by meals nor care for bodies,
sed miseri sua fata gemunt. Mox Nestore pulsi	yet moan their miserable fates. Then, pushed by Nestor,
legatos mittunt dextramque hortantur Achillis,	they send emissaries and exhort the right hand of Achilles,
ut ferat auxilium miseris. Thetideius heros	that he bring aid to miseries. The hero son of Thetis
nec Danaum capit aure preces nec munera regis	neither receives the Danaans' prayers by ear, nor wants any
ulla referre cupit; non illum redditus ignis	of the king's gifts brought back: neither the return of fire
aut intacta suo Briseis corpore mouit.	nor the intact body of his Briseis moves him.
Irrita legati referunt responsa Pelasgis	The emissaries bring back responsesin vain to the Pelasgians,
et dapibus curant animos lenique sopore.	and care for the souls by meals and gentle sleep.
Alterius tenebrae tarde labentibus astris	The second part of night, the stars sliding slowly by,
restabatque super tacitae pars tertia noctis,	a third part of the night also remained over the silence,
cum Danaum iussu castris Aetolius heros	when the Aetolian hero goes out by command,
egreditur sociumque sibi delegit Vlixem,	from the Danaans' camp,and selects Ulysses as ally for himself
qui secum tacitae sublustri noctis in umbra	who goes with him in the faintly-lit shadows of silent night
scrutetur studio quae sit fiducia Troum	that he may search out by studywhat the Trojans' faith may be,
quidue agitent quantasue parent in proelia uires.	what they are doing,and how many forces they prepare for battle.
Dumque iter horrendum loca pernoctata pauentes	And while they pursued the dreadful journey,fearing places through the night,
carpebant, uenit ecce Dolon, quem Troia pubes	Look! Dolon comes, whom the Trojan young man
miserat, ut Danaum sollerti pectore uires	had sent, that he might observeby skillful heart the Danaans' forces,
perspiceret sensusque ducum plebisque referret.	and bring back a sense to the leaders and people.
Quem procul ut uidit socius Diomedis Vlixes,	As Ulysses, ally of Diomedes, sees him far off,
abdiderant occultantes sua corpora furtim	they had hidden, concealing their bodies stealthily
post densos frutices, dum spe percussus inani	behind dense bushes, while the Trojan, son of Eumedia,
Tros Eumediades cursu praecederet illos,	struck by small hope, was going before them at a run,
ne facile oppressus gressum in sua castra referret.	that he not, easily subdued,bring the steps back into his camps.
Post, ubi transierat fidens animoque manuque,	After, when he had passed, trusting both soul and hand,
prosiluere uiri iuuenemque euadere cursu	the men jump out and take the youth, he trying
conantem capiunt ferroque manuque minantur.	to escape at a run,and they threaten him with iron and hand.
Ille timore pauens: "Vitam concedite" - dixit -,	Shaking with fear, he said, "Grant life,
"hoc unum satis est; quodsi perstatis in ira,	this one is enough;  that if you stand firm in anger,
quanta ex morte mea capietis praemia laudis?	how many rewards of praisewill you capture from my death?
At si cur ueniam tacitis exquiritis umbris:	And if you ask why I come in silent shadows:
maxima Troia mihi currum promisit Achillis	great Troy promised me Achilles' chariot
si uestras cepisset opes. Haec dona secutus	if she captures your riches. Pursuing these gifts,
in dubios casus, coram quod cernitis ipsi,	in doubtful fortunes, before which you yourselves discern,
infelix cecidi. Nunc uos per numina diuum,	I have fallen, unhappy.Now I implore you, by the gods' divinities,
per mare, per Ditis fluctus obtestor opaci,	by the sea, by the dark flood of Dis,
ne rapere hanc animam crudeli caede uelitis.	that you not take away this soul by cruel slaughter!
Haec pro concessa referetis dona salute:	You will bring back these gifts for the concession of safety:
consilium Priami regis remque ordine gentis	I will make known to you King Priam's counsel
expediam Phrygiae." Postquam quid Troia pararet	and the affair of the Phrygian nation by order."After the men learned
cognouere uiri, fauces mucrone recluso	what Troy had prepared, they cut the youth's throat
detrudunt iuuenis. Post haec tentoria Rhesi	by open sword. After this, they enter
intrant atque ipsum somno uinoque sepultum	the tents of Rhesus, and kill him, buried
obtruncant spoliantque uirum fusosque per herbam	in sleep and wine,and they plunder the man, and deprive of life
exanimant socios. Tum tristi caede peracta	the allies scattered over the grass.Then, the sad slaughter carried through,
praeda umeros onerant, multo et candore nitentes	they carry plunder on shoulders, much and brightly shining.
Thracas equos rapiunt, quos nec praecederet Eurus	They take away Thracian horses,which not even Eurus can outrun
nec posset uolucri cursu superare sagitta.	nor can a flying arrow overcome by speed.
Inde iterum Argolicas primae sub tempore lucis	From there, they return again to the Argive ships
ad classes redeunt, quos Nestoris accipit aetas	before the time of first light,whom the age of Nestor receives
ac recipit portis. Postquam sua castra tenebant,	and opens the gates. After they obtained the camps,
facta duci referunt: laudat Pelopeius heros,	they bring back the factsto the leader: the Pelopeian hero praises
fessaque iucundae tradunt sua membra quieti.	and, exhausted,they hand their members over to happy quiet.
Lux exorta uiros in pristina bella remisit,	Light risen has sent men back into the former war,
instaurantque animos recreato milite pugnae	and restores the fighting spiritsof Dardanian and Danaan leaders,
Dardanidum Danaumque duces: uolat undique nubes	by refreshed soldiery;  a cloud of spears flies on every side,
telorum et ferro ferrum sonat, undique mixtis	and iron sounds on iron. Mixed on every side,
inter se strident mucronibus: instat utrimque	they struggle among themselves by sword, and a dense line
densa acies mixtusque fluit cum sanguine sudor.	presses each side, and sweat flows mixed with blood.
Tandem feruenti Danaum rex concitus ira	At length, the Danaans' king, stirred by boiling rage,
Antiphon ingenti prostratum uulnere fundit	pours out Antiphon, laid low by a giant wound,
Pisandrumque simul fratremque ad bella ruentem	and Pisandrus likewise, and Hippolochus his brother,
Hippolochum; post hos gladio petit Iphidamanta.	rushing to war;  after these, he aims at Iphidamas by sword.
Hic frater dextram iaculo ferit; ille dolore	This brother strikes the king's right hand by spear; 
acrior accepto fugientem Antenore natum	taken by pain, he bitterly pursues Antenor's fleeing son
persequitur traxitque ferox cum uulnere poenas.	and, furious with the wound, drags punishments.
Hector tunc pugnae subit acri concitus ira	Then Hector, Priam's son, stirred by rage,goes up bitterly to fight
Priamides et percussos agit undique Graios;	and presses the stricken Greeks on every side; 
nec Paris hostiles cessat prosternere turmas	nor does Paris cease to lay low hostile troops,
Eurypylique femur contento uulnerat arcu.	and wounds Eurypylus's thigh by stretched bow.
Incumbunt Troes, fugiunt in castra Pelasgi	The Trojans press in, the Pelasgians flee into the camps,
uiribus exhaustis et uastis undique firmant	forces exhausted, and strengthen the walls on all sides
obicibus muros. Tum saxo Martius Hector	by vast bars. Then Mars-like Hector breaches
perfringit portas ferrataque robora laxat.	the gates by a stone, and loosens the iron-covered oak.
Irrumpunt aditus Phryges atque in limine primo	Having approached, the Phrygians break in and scatter
restantes sternunt Graios ualloque cateruas	the resisting Greeks on the threshold,and overthrow the troops
deturbant, alii scalas in moenia poscunt	by the palisade;  others demand laddersagainst the fortifications
et iaciunt ignes: auget uictoria uires.	and cast fires;  victory augments forces.
De muris pugnant Danai turresque per altas.	The Danaans fight from the walls and towersfrom the heights.
Saxa uolant, subeunt acta testudine Troes	Stones fly, the Trojans climb up, under locked shields,
ascenduntque aditus et portis uiribus instant.	and, having approached, mount up,and press the gates by forces.
Turbati fugiunt omnes iam castra Pelasgi	Troubled, all flee already the Pelasgian camps,
et scandunt puppes. Vrget Troiana iuuentus	and climb the ships. The Trojan youth urges
telaque crebra iacit: resonat clamoribus aether.	and casts close-packed spears:the sky resounds with the outcries.
Neptunus uires Danais animumque ministrat:	Neptune helps the Danaans' forces and spirit:
pugna ingens oritur, furit istinc hostis et illinc.	giant battle arises,the enemy rages from here and from there.
Idomenei dextra cadit Asius; Hector atrocem	Asius falls at Idomeneus's right hand. Hector kills
Amphimachum obtruncat nec non occumbit in armis	bloody Amphimachus, nor does Alcathous, son of Anchises
Anchisae gener Alcathous, quem fuderat ense	not meet death in arms, whom the noble in spirit leader
magnanimus ductor Rhytieus. Tunc feruidus hasta	Rhytieus pours out by sword. Then angry Deiphobus
Deiphobus ferit Ascalaphum mergitque sub undas.	strikes Ascalaphus by spear, and he sinks under the waves.
Hector ubique ferus uiolento pectore saeuit,	Fierce Hector rages on all sides by violent heart
quem saxo ingenti percussum maximus Aiax	whom, struck by a giant stone, great Ajax
depulit et toto prostratum corpore fudit.	drove away, and poured out all the body prostrate.
Concurrit Troiana manus iuuenemque uomentem	The Trojans' hand runs together to wash the youth,
sanguineos fluctus Xanthi lauere fluentis.	vomiting flowing blood, in the flood of Xanthus.
Inde iterum ad pugnam redeunt; fit maxima caedes	They return again from there to the fight; let great slaughters happen
amborum et manat tellus infecta cruore.	of both sides, and the ground flows with hostile gore.
Polydamas ualido Prothoenora percutit ictu,	Polydamas strikes Prothoenor by a mighty blow,
Archelochumque Antenoriden Telamonius Aiax,	Telamonian Ajax kills Archelochus of Antenor,
Boeotumque Acamas Promachum, quem sternit atrocis	and Acamas kills Promachus of Boeotia,whom he scatters viciously.
Penelei dextra; inde cadit Priameia pubes	of Peneleos's right hand; from there Priam's young man falls back.
acrius insurgunt Troes ad Achaica bella	The Trojans surge forward bitterly against the Achaeans
pulsa metu uallumque et muros aggere saeptos	pushed by fear of wars, and they leap across the threshold
transiliunt, alii fossas uoluuntur in ipsas.	and the piled up walls around; others return to the trenches in them.
Aduolat interea Danaum metus impiger Hector:	Meanwhile impatient Hector,dread of the Danaans, flies forward:
confugiunt iterum ad classes Agamemnonis alae	the wings of Agamemnon flee together again to the ships
atque inde aduersis propellunt uiribus hostem.	and from there they push forwardagainst the enemy by strengths.
Fit pugna ante rates, saeuit Mauortius Hector	Let the fight happen before the vessels!Mars-like Hector rages,
et poscit flammas totamque incendere classem	and demands flames, and prepares to burn all the ships.
apparat. Huic ualidis obsistit uiribus Aiax,	Ajax opposes him by mighty strengths,
stans prima in puppi, clipeoque incendia saeua	standing in the first ship, and sustains savage fire
sustinet et solus defendit mille carinas.	by shield, and alone defends a thousand keels.
Hinc iaciunt Danai robustae cuspidis hastas,	On this side, Danaans cast spears of oaken points,
illinc ardentes taedas Phryges undique iactant;	on that side Phrygians throw burning pines from every side; 
per uastos sudor pugnantum defluit artus.	sweat flows from the warriors' vast limbs.
Non ualet ulterius cladem spectare suorum	Patroclus cannot bear to see their defeat again
Patroclus subitoque armis munitus Achillis	and, quickly fortified by Achilles' arms,
prouolat et falsa conterret imagine Troas.	flies forward and terrifies the Trojans togetherby a false image.
Qui modo turbabant Danaos animoque fremebant,	Those who just now troubled the Danaansand raged in spirit,
nunc trepidi fugiunt, fugientibus imminet ille	now flee, fearful;  he threatens the fleeing
perturbatque ferox acies uastumque per agmen	and, fierce, disturbs the front,scatters them through the vast battle line,
sternit et ingenti Sarpedona uulnere fundit	and pours out Sarpedon by a giant wound.
et nunc hos cursu nunc illos praeterit ardens	And burning, now he passes these, now those, in course,
proeliaque horrendi sub imagine uersat Achillis.	and turns the battle under the image of horrid Achilles.
Quem postquam socias miscentem caede cateruas	Whom, after mixing the allied ranks by slaughter
turbantemque acies respexit feruidus Hector,	and troubling the front, fiery Hector looked back on.
tollit atrox animos uastisque immanis in armis	The bloody man takes heart and, vast in inhuman arms,
occurrit contra magnoque hunc increpat ore:	runs against him, and rebukes him by great mouth:
"Huc, age, huc conuerte gradum, fortissime Achilles:	"Attack here, turn your steps here, mightiest Achilles:
iam nosces ultrix quid Troica dextera possit	even now you will know what vengeancea Trojan right hand may work,
et quantum bello ualeat fortissimus Hector.	and how much mightiest Hector may prevail by war.
Nam licet ipse suis Mauors te protegat armis,	For it is lawful that Mars himself protect you by his arms; 
inuito tamen haec perimet te dextera Marte."	nevertheless, this right hand will kill you,though Mars be unwilling"
Ille silet spernitque minas animosaque dicta,	He keeps silent, and spurns the threats and bold words,
ut quem mentitur uerus credatur Achilles.	that he may be believed the true Achilles,whom he pretended.
Tunc prior intorquet collectis uiribus hastam	Then, the Dardanian first hurls a spear by gathered forces,
Dardanides, quam prolapsam celeri excipit ictu	which blow, fallen short, Patroclus quickly picks up
Patroclus redditque uices et, mutua dona,	and returns the changes and, in return of gifts,
quod clipeo excussum uiridi tellure resedit.	that, striking the shield, it settles to the green earth.
Tunc rigidos stringunt enses et comminus armis	Then, they draw rigid blades and mix together
inter se miscent, donec Troianus Apollo	in close quarters by arms, until the Trojan's Apollo
mentitos uultus simulati pandit Achillis	reveals the lying face of the pretended Achilles,
denudatque uirum, quem bello maximus Hector	and strips the man, whom fighting by deceit,
pugnantem falsis postquam deprendit in armis,	great at war Hector afterwards seizes in arms,
irruit et iuuenem nudato pectore ferro	rushes, and by naked iron pierces the youth
traicit et uictor Vulcania detrahit arma.	in the chest, and the victor strips off the Vulcanian arms.
Vindicat exstincti corpus Telamonius Aiax	Telamonian Ajax claims the dead body,
oppositoque tegit clipeo. Priameia pubes	and covers it by an opposing shield. Priam's young man
laetitia exsultat, Danai sua uulnera maerent.	exults with joy, the Danaans grieve their wound.
Interea iuuenis tristi cum pube suorum	Meanwhile, Nestor's sons with their men carry
Nestorides in castra ferunt miserabile corpus.	the miserable body of the sad youth into the camps
Tunc ut Pelidae aures diuerberat horror,	Then, as the horror strikes the ears of Pelides,
palluit infelix iuuenis, calor ossa reliquit;	unhappy, he grows pale about the youth,heat leaves the bones; 
membra simul lacrimans materno innectit amictu,	members likewise weeping, he ties on the mother's cloak.
deflens Aeacides tristi de caede sodalis;	Wailing openly from sadnessabout the slaughter of his intimate companion; 
unguibus ora secat comptosque in puluere crines	Aeacides cuts his face by nails. He deforms adorned hair
deformat, scindit firmo de pectore uestes	in dust. He tears the clothing from his firm chest
et super exstincti prostratus membra sodalis	and, prostrate over the dead membersof his intimate companion,
crudeles fundit questus atque oscula figit.	pours out cruel questions, and affixes kisses.
Mox ubi depositi gemitus lacrimaeque quierunt:	Then where he was placed, they quiet moaning and tears
"Non impune mei laetabere caede sodalis,	"You, Hector, will not rejoice unpunishedat my companion's slaughter,"
Hector" - ait - "magnoque meo, uiolente, dolori	he said - "Violent one, you will pay the penalties
persolues poenas atque istis uictor in armis,	of my great sadness, as victor in these arms
in quibus exsultas, fuso moriere cruore."	in which you exult, gore poured out to die!"
Post haec accensus furiis decurrit ad aequor	After this, ignited by furies, he rushes to the sea; 
fortiaque arma Thetin supplex rogat: illa relictis	suppliant, he prays Thetis for mighty arms;  she, leaving
fluctibus auxilium Vulcani protinus orat.	the waves, at once begs Vulcan's help.
Excitat Aetnaeos calidis fornacibus ignes	Mulciber stirs up the Aetnaeans' firesto blazing furnaces
Mulciber et ualidis fuluum domat ictibus aurum.	and by mighty blows masters yellow gold.
Mox effecta refert diuinis artibus arma.	Then, he brings back complete arms of divine makings.
Euolat inde Thetis; quae postquam magnus Achilles	Thetis flies back from there;  in which, after great Achilles
induit, in clipeum uultus conuertit atroces.	puts them on, he turns his terrifying face to the shield.
Illic Ignipotens mundi caelauerat arcem	There, the Fire-Mighty engraved an elegant citadel,
sideraque et liquidis redimitas undique nymphis	and stars, and garlanded sea nymphs on every side,
Oceani terras et cinctum Nerea circum	the lands of Ocean, and Nerea bound around,
astrorumque uices dimensaque tempora noctis,	changes of stars, and measures of the four watches of night,
quattuor et mundi partes, quantum Arctos ab Austro	and parts of the world, as far as the Arctics from the South,
et quantum occasus roseo distaret ab ortu,	and as far as of sunset stands from the rosy dawn,
Lucifer unde suis, unde Hesperus unus uterque	from where Light-Bearer and Hesperus,one no matter which,
exoreretur equis, et quantum in orbe mearet	shine forth by horses,and as far as the hollow Moon wanders
Luna caua et nitida lustraret lampade caelum;	in the sphere and, shining, purifies the sky by its lamp:
addideratque fretis sua numina: Nerea magnum	and he added their divinities of sea: great Nereus
Oceanumque senem nec eundem Protea semper,	and old Ocean, and Proteus always changing,
Tritonasque feros et amantem Dorida fluctus;	fierce Tritons, and the floods beloved of Doris; 
fecerat et liquidas mira Nereidas arte.	and he made by marvelous art liquid-seeming Nereids.
Terra gerit siluas horrendaque monstra ferarum	Earth bears woods and horrid wild monsters,
fluminaque et montes cumque altis oppida muris,	rivers and mountains, and towns of high walls,
in quibus exercent leges annosaque iura	in which contending peoples exercise ancient laws
certantes populi; sedet illic aequus utrisque	and customs;  there sits a judge impartial
iudex et litem discernit fronte serena.	to each side, and he decides quarrels with a serene face.
Parte alia castae resonant Paeana puellae	In another part, chaste girls resound hymns to Apollo
dantque choros molles et tympana dextera pulsat;	and give soft choruses, and right hands strum tympanies; 
ille lyrae graciles extenso pollice chordas	Apollo plays the chords of a graceful lyreby extended thumb,
percurrit septemque modos modulatur auenis:	and now modulates the seven notes by reeds; 
carmina componunt mundi resonantia motum.	they compose songs,resounding the movement of the world.
Rura colunt alii, sulcant grauia arua iuuenci	Others cultivate farms, plow grave furrows by oxen,
maturasque metit robustus messor aristas	and the mighty one, the harvester of grains,reaps mature crops; 
et gaudet pressis immundus uinitor uuis;	and a vintner rejoices, unclean from pressed grapes; 
tondent prata greges, pendent in rupe capellae.	flocks clips meadows, goats hang in the rocks.
Haec inter mediis stabat Mars aureus armis,	Here among all Mars was standing in golden arms,
quem diua poesis reliquae* circaque sedebant	whom the goddess of poetry abandoned,gloomy Chlotho,
anguineis maestae Clotho Lachesisque capillis.	and Lachesis of snake-like hairs were sitting nearby.
Talibus ornatus donis Thetideius heros	Adorned by such gifts, the hero son of Thetis,
in medias acies immani turbine fertur,	throws himself by an inhuman whirlwindamong the battle lines,
cui uires praebet casta cum Pallade Iuno	to whom Juno with chaste Pallas provides forces,
dantque animos iuueni. Vidit Cythereius heros	and they give spirits to the youth.The Cytherian hero sees
occurritque uiro, sed non cum uiribus aequis	and opposes the man, yet not with equal arms,
Aeacidae nec compar erat, tamen ira coegit	nor was he equal to Aeacides, yet wrath drives
conferre inuictis iuuenem cum uiribus arma.	the youth to match himselfwith the unconquered one by armed forces.
Quem nisi seruasset magnarum rector aquarum,	Unless the ruler of great waters had saved him,
ut profugus laetis Troiam repararet in aruis	that as a refugee he replant Troy in happy fields,
Augustumque genus claris submitteret astris,	and raise up the famous race of Augustus to the stars,
non clarae gentis nobis mansisset origo.	the origin of a famous racewould not have continued to us.
Inde agit Aeacides infesta cuspide Teucros	From there Aeacides attacks the Teucrons by hostile lance
ingentemque modum prosternit caede uirorum,	and lays low a giant measure of men by slaughter,
sanguinis Hectorei sitiens. At Dardana pubes	thirsting for Hector's blood. The Dardan young man
confugit ad Xanthi rapidos perterrita fluctus	flees, terrified, to the rapid floods of Xanthus
auxiliumque petit diuini fluminis; ille	and begs divine aid of the river;  He
instat et in mediis pugnatur gurgitis undis.	presses, and fights in the middle of raging waves.
Ira dabat uires; stringuntur sanguine ripae	Anger was giving strengths; the banks were stretched tight by blood,
sparsaque per totos uoluuntur corpora fluctus.	and bodies float, scattered along all the floods.
At Venus et Phrygiae gentis tutator Apollo	Both Venus and Apollo, protector of the Phrygian nation,
cogunt in Danaos Xanthi consurgere fluctus,	compel the flood of Xanthus to surge among the Danaans.
ut fera terribili miscentem proelia dextra	that, mixing in wild battle by its terrible right hand,
obruat Aeaciden; qui protinus undique totis	it may cover Aeacides; the River all at once wanders headlong from its course
exspatiatur aquis et uasto gurgite praeceps	on every side, by all waters and vast whirlpools,
uoluitur atque uirum torrentibus impedit undis	and turns the man back by torrents, impedes him by waves,
praetardatque gradus. Ille omni corpore saeuas	and hinders his steps. Raging with the whole body,
contra pugnat aquas aduersaque flumina rumpit	he fights against the waters,and breaks through the opposing floods; 
et modo disiectos umeris modo pectore uasto	and now breaking them in half by arms, now by vast chest,
propellit fluctus. Quem longe prouida Iuno	he drives the flood. Juno, seeing him from far off, helps
asseruit, rapidae quia cederet, ignibus, undae,	by fires, because he began falling under the rapid waves,
sanctaque pugnarunt inter se numina diuum.	and the holy divinities of the gods fight among themselves.
Rursus agit Phrygias ingenti caede cateruas	Horrid Aeacides again attacks the Phrygian troops
horridus Aeacides bellique ardore resumpto	with giant slaughter and, having resumed warlike ardor,
funereas acies horrendaque proelia miscet.	mixes deadly battle lines and horrendous battle.
Non illum uis ulla mouet, non saeua fatigant	No force moves him, nor do his savage sentiments
pectora bellando; uires successus adauget.	tire of war-making;  success augments strengths.
Percussi dubitant trepida formidine Troes	Struck by trembling fear, the Trojans began doubting
atque intra muros exhausta paene salute	and, exhausted, barely flee to safety inside
confugiunt portasque obiecto robore firmant.	the walls, and shut the gates by oaken bar.-One
Vnus tota salus in quo Troiana manebat	One safety remained in which all the Trojans hoped:
Hector adest, quem non durae timor undique mortis,	Hector is here,whom neither fear of harsh death on every side,
non patriae tenuere preces, quin obuius iret	nor the father's prayers to hold back,so that he might go out to meet
et contra magnum contendere uellet Achillem.	and wishes to contend against great Achilles.
Quem procul ut uidit tectum caelestibus armis,	As he sees him far off, covered by celestial arms,
ante oculos subito uisa est Tritonia Pallas	Tritonian Pallas appeared suddenly before his eyes,
pertimuit clausisque fugit sua moenia circum	and he was terrified. He flees, unhappy,around his fortification,
infelix portis, sequitur Nereius heros:	the gates closed;  the Nereian hero follows:
in somnis ueluti, cum pectora terruit ira,	as if in dreams, when anger terrified the heart,
hic cursu super insequitur, fugere ille uidetur,	this one follows by course above, that one seems to flee,
festinantque ambo, gressum labor ipse moratur,	and both hurry. Labor itself delays steps,
alternis poterant insistere coepta periclis,	they can by turns insist, the trial begun,
nec requies aderat, timor undique concitat iras.	nor is rest at hand. Fear stirs up rages from every side.-Two
Spectant de muris miseri sua fata parentes	The miserable parents watch his destinies from the walls,
pallentemque uident supremo tempore natum	and see their son growing pale at the last moment,
quem iam summa dies suprema luce premebat.	whom already now the last day presses by its final light.
Huic subito ante oculos similis Tritonia fratri	To him suddenly before his eyes Tritonia,meeting the youth
occurrens iuuenem simulato decipit ore;	in the likeness of his brother, deceiving by pretended face; 
nam cum Deiphobi tutum se credidit armis,	(for he believes himself safe in arms with Deiphobus,)
transtulit ad Danaos iterum sua numina Pallas.	Pallas again transfers her divinities to the Danaans.
Concurrunt iactis inter se comminus hastis	The unconquered youths run together, throwing spears
inuicti iuuenes: hic uastis intonat armis,	between themselves at close quarters:this one intones by vast arms,
ille hostem ualidum nequiquam umbone repellit	that one repels the mighty enemy in vain by shield
alternisque ferox mutat congressibus ictus.	and, fierce, changes blows in turn by grapplings.
Sudor agit riuos, ensem terit horridus ensis	Sweat makes streams, horrid blade wears out blade,
collatusque haeret pede pes et dextera dextrae.	joined in battle, foot clings to foot,and right hand to right hand.
Hastam iam manibus saeuus librabat Achilles	Savage Achilles already now was hurling a spear by hands,
inque uirum magnis emissam uiribus egit,	and drives it at the man, sent out by great strengths,
quam praeterlapsam uitauit callidus Hector.	which gliding past, cunning Hector avoids.
Exclamant Danai. Contra Priameius heros	The Danaans shout out. In answer, the hero Priamides
uibratum iaculum Vulcania torquet in arma.	hurls a vibrating javelin against the Vulcanian arms.
Nec successus adest: nam duro inflectitur auro	Nor is success near: for it is bent by hard gold
dissiluitque mucro. Gemuerunt agmina Troum.	and the sharp point shattered. The Trojan battle lines groan.
Concurrunt iterum collatis fortiter armis	They run together mightily again, by gathered arms,
inque uicem duros euitant comminus enses.	and in turn avoid at close quarters the harsh sword.
Nec sufferre ualet ultra sortemque supremam	Nor does Hector, with failing strengths,prevail to resist further
stantemque Aeaciden defectis uiribus Hector.	the ultimate fate, and Aeacides standing.
Dumque retro cedit fraternaque rebus in artis	And while he falls backward, and looks for his brother's help
respicit auxilia et nullam uidet esse salutem,	by crafty causes, and sees no safety to be there,
sensit adesse dolos. Quid agat? quae numina supplex	he senses deceits at hand. What can he do? What divinities
inuocet? et toto languescunt corpore uires	can he invoke, suppliant?And all the body's strengths languish
auxiliumque negant; retinet uix dextera ferrum,	and they deny help;  the right hand hardly retains iron,
nox oculos inimica tegit nec subuenit ullum	hostile night covers the eyes, nor does any rescue come,
defesso auxilium; pugnat moriturus et alto	wearied of help;  the dying one fights, and presses down
corde premit gemitus. Instat Nereius heros	a groan by high heart. The Nerean hero presses in,
turbatumque premit procul undique; tunc iacit hastam	and from afar attacks the troubled man from all sides.Then he throws a spear
et medias rigida transfixit cuspide fauces.	and pierces through the middle of his guts by rigid lance.
Exsultant Danai, Troes sua uulnera deflent.	The Danaans exult, the Trojans bewail his wound.
Tunc sic amissis infelix uiribus Hector:	Then wretched Hector, parting so from strengths:
"En concede meos miseris genitoribus artus,	"Look, concede my body to my miserable parents,
quos pater infelix multo mercabitur auro:	which the unhappy father will buy with much gold:
dona feres uictor. Priami nunc filius orat,	you, victor, will carry off gifts. Now Priam's son prays,
te Priamus, dux ille ducum, quem Graecia solum	Priam prays you, that leader of leaders, whom Greece alone
pertimuit: si, nec precibus nec munere uictus,	has feared;  if, won neither by prayers nor by gift,
nec lacrimis miseri nec clara gente moueris,	you are movedneither by miserable tears nor famous nation
afflicti miserere patris: moueat tua Peleus	to have mercy on the afflicted father: may Peleus move
pectora pro Priamo, pro nostro corpore Pyrrhus."	your heart for Priam, Pyrrhus for our body."
Talia Priamides. Quem contra durus Achilles:	Such Priamides. Against him, harsh Achilles:
"Quid mea supplicibus temptas inflectere dictis	"Why do you try by suppliant words to bend
pectora, quem possem direptum more ferarum,	my heart, I who can tear you apart like wild beasts,
si sineret natura, meis absumere malis?	if nature allowed, to consume you by my jaws?
Te uero tristesque ferae cunctaeque uolucres	Truly, sad beasts and all the birds will tear you
diripient, auidosque canes tua uiscera pascent.	apart, and hungry dogs will feed on your insides.
Haec ex te capient Patrocli gaudia manes,	These will seize you, to the joy of Patroclus's ghost,
si sapiunt umbrae." Dum talia magnus Achilles	if shadows know." While great Achilles in this manner
ore truci iactat, uitam miserabilis Hector	threw insults by savage mouth, Hector gave back
reddidit. Hunc animi nondum satiatus Achilles	his miserable life. Achilles, not yet satisfied in soul,
deligat ad currum pedibusque exsanguia membra	ties him to the chariot by the feet, and the victor
ter circum muros uictor trahit; altius ipsos	dragged the bloodless membersthree times around the walls; 
fert domini successus equos. Tum maximus heros	the master's successbrings the horses themselves pride.Then the great hero
detulit ad Danaos foedatum puluere corpus.	brought the body, defiled by dust, back to the Danaans.
Laetantur Danai, plangunt sua uulnera Troes	The Danaans rejoice, the Trojans grieve their wound,
et pariter captos deflent cum funere muros.	and bewail the captured walls as well with his death.-Three
Interea uictor defleti corpus amici	Meanwhile, Aeacides the victor, bewailing his friend's body
funerat Aeacides pompasque ad funera ducit.	makes a funeral, and leads processions to the solemn rites.
Tum circa tumulum miseros rapit Hectoris artus	Then he drags Hector's miserable limbsaround the mound,
et uapido cineri ludorum indicit honores.	and publicly declares the honors of gamesto the lifeless ashes.
Tydides *tyrsin* cursu pedibusque ferocem	And Tydides overcomes fierce Meriones in the footrace.
Merionem superat; luctando uincitur Aiax	Ajax is overcome wrestling,
cuius decepit uires Laertius astu;	whose strengthsthe son of Laertes deceives by cleverness; 
caestibus aduersis cunctos superauit Epeos	Epeos overcomes against all in boxing; 
et disco forti Polypoetes depulit omnes	and mighty Polypoetes defeats all in discus,
Merionesque arcu. Tandem certamine misso	and Meriones wins by bow. At length, the contest closed,
in sua castra redit turbis comitatus Achilles.	Achilles, surrounded by crowds, returns to his camps.-Four
Flent miseri amissum Phryges Hectora totaque maesto	The miserable Phrygians weep Hector lost, and all Troy
Troia sonat planctu; fundit miseranda querelas	sounds with mournful wailing; unhappy Hecuba, who must be pitied,
infelix Hecube saeuisque arat unguibus ora	pours out laments, and plows the face with savage nails.
Andromacheque suas scindit de pectore uestes,	And Andromache tears her clothes from the breast,
heu tanto spoliata uiro. Ruit omnis in uno	Alas! Plundered of such a husband! All the Phrygian cause
Hectore causa Phrygum, ruit hoc defensa senectus	falls in one Hector, the defense falls of the extreme age
afflicti miseranda patris, quem nec sua coniunx	of an afflicted father who must be pitied,whom neither his wife
turbaque natorum nec magni gloria regni	and crowd of children, nor the glory of a great kingdom
oblitum tenuit uitae, quin iret inermis	held him, forgetful of life, so that he goes unarmed
et solum inuicti castris se redderet hostis.	and alone to the camps returned to by undefeated foes.
Mirantur Danaum proceres, miratur et ipse	The Danaans' nobles watch, and Aeacides himself watches
Aeacides animum miseri senis; ille trementes	the soul of the miserable old man;  he, trembling,
affusus genibus tendens ad sidera palmas	prostrate on his knees, holding palms up to the stars,
haec ait: "O Graiae gentis fortissime Achilles,	says this: "O Achilles, mightiest of the Greek nation,
o regnis inimice meis, te Dardana solum	O my kingdom's enemy, you alone the young man
uicta tremit pubes, te sensit nostra senectus	of conquered Dardana fears;  our old age senses
crudelem nimium. Nunc sis mitissimus oro	your overwhelming cruelty.Now, may you be most gentle, I pray,
et patris afflicti genibus miserere precantis	and have mercy on an afflicted father,praying on his knees,
donaque quae porto miseri pro corpore nati	and accept gifts which I bring for my son's miserable body; 
accipias; si nec precibus nec flecteris auro,	if you may be turned neither by prayers nor by gold,
in senis extremis tua dextera saeuiat annis:	let your right hand rage in an old man's extreme years:
saltem saeua pater comitabor funera nati!	at least a father may join a son's savage death!
Nec uitam mihi nec magnos *concedere* honores,	Concede neither life nor great honors to me,
sed funus crudele meum! Miserere parentis	yet my cruel burial! Have mercy on parents,
et pater esse meo mitis de corpore disce.	and learn by my body to be a gentle father.
Hectoris interitu uicisti Dardana regna,	You've conquered the Dardan kingdom by Hector's death,
uicisti Priamum: sortis reminiscere uictor	you've conquered Priam: be mindful, victor, of human fate,
humanae uariosque ducum tu respice casus."	and you look on the various fortunes of leaders."
His tandem precibus grandaeuum motus Achilles	Achilles, moved at length by these prayers, lifted up
alleuat a terra corpusque exsangue parenti	the old man from the ground,and returned the bloodless body of Hector
reddidit Hectoreum. Post haec sua dona reportat	to his father. After this, Priam took back his gifts
in patriam Priamus tristesque ex more suorum	into the fatherland, and in their sorrowful manner
apparat exsequias extremaque funera ducit.	he organizes eulogies and leads last funeral rites.
Tum pyra construitur, qua bis sex corpora Graium	Then a funeral pyre is constructed,to which twice six Greek bodies
quadrupedesque adduntur equi currusque tubaeque	and four-legged horses, and chariots, and trumpets,
et clipei galeaeque cauae argutaque tela.	and shields, and helmets,and clear-sounding hollow arrows, are added.
Haec super ingenti gemitu componitur Hector:	Hector is laid out over these with giant moan:
stant circum Iliades matres manibusque decoros	the Ilian mothers stand around, and tear by hands
abrumpunt crines laniataque pectora plangunt:	decorated hair, and strike torn breasts:
illo namque rogo natorum funera cernunt.	for at that funeral pyrethey discern the deaths of their children.
Tollitur et iuuenum magno cum murmure clamor	And a cry rises from the youth with a great, tearful roar:
flebilis: ardebat flamma namque Ilion illa.	for Ilion's flame burns there also.
Inter quos gemitus laniato pectore coniunx	Among those lamentations,Andromache the wife, breast torn,
prouolat Andromache mediosque immittere in ignes	flies forward,and wants to throw herself into the midst of the fires,
se cupit Astyanacta tenens, quam iussa suarum	holding Astyanax;  the crowd of hers takes her away
turba rapit. Contra tamen omnibus usque resistit,	by command. Nevertheless,she resists against all continuously,
donec collapsae ceciderunt robora flammae	until the collapsing flames fall, of strength,
inque leues abiit tantus dux ille fauillas.	and he, so great a leader, departed into light ashes.
Sed iam siste gradum finemque impone labori,	Yet already now stop the step and put an end to labor,
Calliope, uatisque tui moderare carinam,	Calliope, to moderate the ship of your prophecy,
Remis quem cernis stringentem litora paucis,	which you see ashore, stretched out by light oars
Iamque tenet portum metamque potentis Homeri.	And already it has the port and goal of mighty Homer.
Pieridum comitata cohors, summitte rudentes	Cohort of gathered Pieridan muses, put forth shouts!
Sanctaque uirgineos lauro redimita capillos	And holy one, virgin hair wrapped around by laurel
Ipsa tuas depone lyras. Ades, inclita Pallas,	you yourself put down lyres. Be near, celebrated Pallas,
Tuque faue cursu uatis iam, Phoebe, peracto.	and you, Phoebus, favor a prophet's course now finished!